"x"
"When the Missouri River barreled through town like white-water rapids this summer, and grain bins and City Hall and the Assembly of God church and houses and barns gave way and there were no telephones or electricity or running water, people in this tiny farm town thought they knew all about the power of nature."
"Then the unthinkable happened. The river washed away about two-thirds of the graves at the cemetery where just about anybody who ever lived and died here was buried. The river carved out a crater 50 feet deep where the cemetery used to be. It took cottonwood trees and the brick entryway and carried close to 900 caskets and burial vaults downstream toward St. Louis and the Mississippi."
"The remains of whole families floated away, their two-ton burial vaults coming to rest in tree limbs, on highways, along railroad tracks and in beanfields two and three towns away."
"\"You cannot accept the magnitude of it until you're standing in it,\" said Dean Snow, the Ray County coroner. He said it might take years to find all the remains. Reminders of Losses"
"Now people who lost everything else to the flood are left to weep for the parents they mourned decades ago, the stillborn children they never saw grow up, the husbands taken from them in farm accidents, the mothers who died in childbirth. It is as if the people have died all over again and the survivors must grieve anew."
"Every day they show up at the county fairgrounds to get word of their lost loved ones, gathering at a bulletin board where the names of the dead who have been recovered and identified are posted. People have driven from Kansas City and St. Louis to check on half-brothers or second husbands. A man called from Sacramento, Calif., trying to find his parents. Another flew in from New Mexico to find his mother. She was missing too."
"\"People are just heartsick,\" said Ed Wolfe, who had five generations of relatives in the cemetery. \"It's a trying, a testing time to have to go through this all over again.\""
"About 1,500 people were buried at the Hardin Cemetery, once a pristine landscape nine acres across and now a muddy lake where minnows and snapping turtles live alongside broken headstones and toppled graves. The disaster was all the more astonishing because Hardin is not even a river town. It is some five miles north of the Missouri."
"Since it was founded in 1810, the cemetery had survived tornadoes, floods and the Civil War. No other cemetery in the country has been uprooted like this, officials of the American Cemetery Association say. Local people see the occurrence as near-biblical."
"\"It makes you think, 'What is God saying to us?' \" said Bess Meador, a retired nurse with two husbands in the cemetery. \"What is it we're doing that we shouldn't be doing? You look at that cemetery and you feel so helpless.\""
"Whether a resident lost a direct relative or not, everybody lost someone. Just about everybody in the cemetery was kin."
"So far, the remains of about 200 people have been found, stored in open barns and refrigerated trucks at the county fairgrounds and at a nearby farm. About 90 have been identified. Painful Memories"
"It is a slow, painful task, more common to a plane crash than to a flood, that has required survivors to come in and give disaster volunteers any identifying information they can remember about their relatives."
"Two boxes of tissues sit on the counseling desk for the shower of tears as people dig deep for old memories. Mr. Wolfe had to call up painful details about his only son, Christopher, a stillborn, who would have been 18 years old this year and whose remains are among the missing."
"\"They wanted to know what kind of casket, what color casket,\" Mr. Wolfe said. \"What color his eyes were, what color his hair was, what he was wearing, if he had a little pillow in his casket.\""
"Some people were able to give only the barest description. Some could only remember that a relative had a gold tooth or a hip replacement. Others remembered everything. One man's survivors remembered that he was buried in his Kansas State shorts, with a Timex watch and had a slide rule in his shirt pocket. The relatives of another man said he had a tattoo on his right arm that said \"Irene.\""
"The ordeal has forced Carrie Lee Young, 81, to relive the day she learned that her husband, Roy, had died when a tractor-mower fell on him five years ago. \"He was out mowing by the road,\" she said, her eyes welling with tears. \"And he didn't come in for supper. I couldn't go out looking for him. He had the car. People went out looking for him. They found him late that night. We were getting ready for our 55th wedding anniversary. It would be our 60th this year.\""
"Every Memorial Day, she would carry peonies from her garden to place on the grave he had picked out for himself. Now she fears he is floating somewhere in the Missouri. \"I don't know where my husband is,\" Mrs. Young said. \"It is just pitiful.\" Bad News for Widow"
"She searched in vain for his name on the list and asked a volunteer, Greg Carmichael, if he knew where her husband was. He checked the plot number and the map. \"He's pretty well gone,\" Mr. Carmichael said."
"\"That's what I was afraid of,\" Mrs. Young said, looking away."
"To this town of 598 people, the cemetery was more than a place to bury people. It was an archives, a genealogical museum, a family album without pictures. People could trace their family trees by just walking among the tombstones."
"The other day, Mr. Wolfe stood on the jagged 10-foot cliff at the corner of the cemetery that the river had left alone. Vaults and caskets -- most lacking any identification marks -- jutted from the cliffside, rusting in the sand steppes sculptured by the river. There were pink silk carnations on the remaining graves and broken obelisks and tombstones on their backs in the ravine below as gray-brown water lapped against the shores."
"Mr. Wolfe soberly toured the cemetery, introducing people he knew as if he were at a reunion. \"That's grandma and grandpa Bandy,\" he said of one set of tombstones. Memories of Fatal Accident"
"\"Those were neighbors of ours,\" he said, pointing to the headstones of a mother, father and daughter."
"Joined by Mr. Snow, he came upon the grave of a World War II veteran. \"That's Della's husband,\" he said."
"\"Yeah, Bob's dad,\" Mr. Snow said. \"He was working on his car and it fell on him.\""
"This is the kind of town where husbands and wives buy burial plots together and engrave their names on tombstones long before they die."
"\"You see, that's why grandmother wants a positive identification of grandfather,\" Mr. Chamberlain, a funeral director volunteering here, said. \"Because she wants to be placed next to him, not to next to somebody else.\""
"As people here await word on the recovery effort, some are trying to figure out what to do with the cemetery. Some want to extend it into the adjacent cornfields and maybe put water lilies in the lake the river made as a memorial to those lost to the floods. Others want to move the entire cemetery, including the intact graves, to higher ground. Some want to have a new mass funeral service after more bodies are found."
"Some people said they could not even think about that. \"I can't go through that again,\" said Ethel Kincaid, whose parents' remains are still missing. \"I went through it once. It's just too painful.\""
"County officials have been hauling in about eight caskets a day as farmers and other residents report sightings. Clara Heil, a farmer eight miles east of Hardin, awoke one morning to find 10 vaults in her yard."
"The cemetery itself has attracted tourists from Illinois and Kansas and as far away as Vermont, who drive past police barricades and ignore the \"keep out\" signs to take pictures. \"Is this where the caskets popped out?\" a gawker from Vermont asked Mr. Snow, camera in hand. Baby and Dad Gone"
"But these are hallowed grounds to people like Mr. Wolfe. When Mr. Snow waved him onto the site, he anxiously paced the cemetery in search of his father and stillborn son. He got to the edge of the cliff and saw the earth carved out in the spot where they had been."
"\"My baby and my dad are gone,\" Mr. Wolfe said, his eyes red and watery. \"We've been hoping for five weeks they were safe. The way things are broken up down there, I don't know if they'll ever be recovered.\""
"He wiped his eyes and headed back to the road, walking over dead corn shucks and wheat stubble, to break the news to his wife."
