"x"
"No one alive has seen the Father of Rivers yawn this high or this wide. No one imagined the Mississippi or its relatives would take such liberties, consuming so many hamlets whole, or that, if they did, technology would be nearly helpless to stop them."
"There have been floods before. People in Hannibal, Mo., or Keokuk, Iowa, or Quincy, Ill., can tell you about watching their fathers and uncles pack sandbags to protect the year's corn crop or the feed store. For generations, some farmers figured floods and droughts into the cost of doing business. But then the country's big plumbing system of levees and dams, made better after every flood, was supposed to keep the rivers in their place and maintain the comfortable paradox of living on a floodplain."
"Now the unimaginable has happened. Across the Midwestern cornbelt it has rained in biblical proportions -- 49 straight days, often in torrents. The rivers, driven past their banks, have taken back land that long ago was theirs, invading 15 million acres of farmland in eight states, forcing 36,000 people from their homes, halting river traffic for 600 miles and causing billions of dollars in damage."
"From the air, from Minnesota to Missouri, from Kansas to Illinois, it looks like someone has spilled gallons and gallons of coffee on a green patchwork quilt that happens to be farms and towns. In silt rivers now wide as lakes, treetops look like bushes in a swimming pool, bridges and highways and other brave monuments to engineering are reduced to thin, threatened slivers, and even their builders know the water could take them, too, if it wanted. The floods have made the broad, S-curved Mississippi and its otherwise perfectly ordered valley look more like the Florida Keys."
"Unlike earthquakes and hurricanes, floods defy the human urge to quantify. There is no single measure -- no Richter scale, or mile-per-hour wind as in the eye of a hurricane -- to gauge a flood. There are only the hundreds of crests and toppled levees on the rivers and their swollen creeks, and the thousand heartbreaks of lost soybean fields and moated Main Streets."
"If the floods of 1993 have reminded people of anything, it is that the Mississippi River was never the docile pensioner some had come to think it was. It is not, after all, the Swanee. The Mississippi is America's watery aorta, draining or potentially flooding rivers in 31 states from the Appalachians to the Rocky Mountains."
"\"It's like talking about God Almighty himself,\" said Shelby Foote, the Memphis writer, who has lived his whole life on the river."
"The river, ecologists and farmers say, was never supposed to follow the tight course humans have expected it to, indeed ordered it to, with their walls of dirt and concrete levees. Of course, that has not stopped people from building homes and farms and cities along the river. The Mississippi Valley's thick black soil is considered the richest on earth, impossible for farmers to resist."
"But to claim the land meant making a bargain with the river, confining it to an artificially narrow path so that farms could reach as far as the shore and places like New Orleans and St. Louis could live undisturbed while their goods were carried safely from port to port. The price that river people pay is sudden and catastrophic flooding when excess rainwater, forced into a narrow channel by the levees, runs out of places to go and cannot drain naturally into the soil."
"Then the river goes faster and faster, and it goes where it wishes, as it did during the flooding of the lower Mississippi in 1927, where, as William Faulkner wrote, the river \"was now doing what it liked to do, had waited patiently the 10 years in order to do, as a mule will work for you 10 years for the privilege of kicking you once.\""
"Mr. Foote was a boy during that flood. He remembers when word came that the levee had broken at Mounds Landing in Scott, Miss., north of Greenville. \"It was a slow creeping rise,\" he said. \"You can't even see it rise but if you turn away and then you look back, you see it is a little higher. Everything in its path is submerged or invaded. It presses against every crack and crevice. It's like solid wind when it comes.\""
"Because of its might and willfulness, some ecologists argue that the very way people define a river is not particularly useful. They say that the river is not just whatever water you see in the channel, but the banks, the floodplain, in fact, the valley itself, from bluff to bluff. It is anywhere the water has been and could potentially go -- a river, Mark Twain said, \"whose alluvial banks cave and change constantly, whose snags are always hunting up new quarters, whose sand bars are never at rest.\""
"In earlier centuries, when towns in the bottomlands were invaded by river water, townspeople packed up and moved to higher ground -- as Franklin, Mo., for example, on the Missouri River, did in 1826. (Even that move could not save Franklin this time, however; the town is under water again.) Now, more than 7 million people live directly along the Mississippi, including more than 2 million around its confluence with the Missouri in St. Louis, where the two rivers are now cresting and levees straining and crumbling."
"\"No one is going to move St. Louis just because it happens to be in the river,\" said David Johnson, an aquatic ecologist who is assistant director of the School of Natural Resources at Ohio State University. \"It's a question of working with the river or fighting the river. Fighting the river is almost always going to be a losing battle.\""
"He argues for restoring the kind of wide open spaces that the river once had before Europeans and the great cities came, wetlands where the water could collect in times of severe rains. The Army Corps of Engineers reservoirs to catch the run-off, although the current flooding suggests they may not be enough. In defense of the complex and normally efficient flood control system, hydraulic engineers say that without the man-made reservoirs, the bloated river would now stretch from bluff to bluff, five miles across in spots, covering what we now know as Dubuque, Iowa, or St. Louis. Return of the Marshes"
"\"People think of the river as their enemy,\" said David Lanegran, a professor of geography and urban studies at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minn. \"They fight the river, dike the river, pollute the river, ignore the river. Now the river is taking back its old places. You can see the old marshes coming back in the farmers' fields, all the places where the duck ponds used to be. It's almost like a ghost. The water is saying, 'This is where I used to be. This used to be my place.' \""
"That may be cold comfort to people whose homes and businesses are under the water. But there are some important differences between this disaster and others."
"Things have changed since the days of Mark Twain, when armed guards patrolled levees to insure no one tampered with them or when, according to his stories, just about the only time a crowd would gather on the river was for a dogfight or a lynching. The flood has been remarkable for the show of volunteerism and general goodwill; there have been few reports of looting, and many of people driving for miles to work through the night sandbagging someone else's levee. It is a contrast to the country's biggest disaster of last year, Hurricane Andrew, which brought looters, and merchants jacking up the price of generators and people posing as carpenters and bilking roofless homeowners."
"In Des Moines, where flooding of the Raccoon River knocked out the fresh water supply of 250,000 people, leaving residents without water to drink or take showers or fight fires or flush toilets with, people have shared well water, grocery stores have discounted bottled water and every other morning three senior citizens drive to a nursing home for the handicapped, where they deliver fresh water and personally flush all 126 toilets."
"Midwesterners do these kinds of things, people here say, because even most city people originally came from small, rural towns where everybody knows everybody and it is an insult to take advantage. \"These are standard, practical and utilitarian Midwestern values,\" said Douglas Hurt, director of the graduate program in agricultural and rural studies at the Iowa State University. \"If your neighbor needs help, regardless of the spats you've had, you help him.\""
"If there is an economic beneficiary of this flood, it is the farm states of the eastern Midwest -- Michigan, Ohio and Indiana, where farmers will get to take advantage of the run-up in crop prices due to the low supply."
"\"That will make the flood even more painful for farmers in the floodplains,\" said William Heffernan, a professor and chairman of rural sociology at the University of Missouri in Columbia. \"They will be watching the highest prices in years and, they don't have anything to sell.\" Lifting and Cleansing"
"As disastrous as a flood is to those in its path, it is nonetheless part of a natural cycle of renewal just as forest fires are. The river channels grow so wide and the currents so strong they lift topsoil, carry nutrients downstream and deposit them in new soil. Iowa's loss may be Missouri's gain, but then Iowa may get its own refill from Minnesota. The heavy rains that precede the flooding can also cleanse the river waters and make a better pool for fish to spawn."
"The current crisis will undoubtedly set off wide debate over ways to improve the system with an eye not to just one city or river but to the 250 or so creeks and rivers that feed into the Mississippi."
"Only fairly recently in the river's history, when Congress authorized a Federal levee project after the 1927 flood, has there been any system-wide approach to flood control. But that was based in part on bringing up to code the haphazard levees of assorted farm towns who in times of desperation built wherever they felt like it. New and better levees have gone up, but they, too, can fail."
"\"People expect more out of what was there than was ever intended,\" said Harry Kitch, chief of the central planning management branch of the Army Corps of Engineers. \"Any one of our structures can be overtopped if you have a big enough flood. We do a great deal of sophisticated work in rebuilding them, but there can always be a bigger flood.\""
"The great lesson of the floods may be that humans will have to do a lot more if they are to outwit nature, if that is even possible."
"\"I think we as moderns tend to think that geological and meteorological changes have stopped,\" said said Bruce Michaelson, a professor of English at the University of Illinois at Urbana, who is writing a book about Mark Twain, \"that volcanoes will no longer erupt, that hurricanes will no longer come off the coasts and the great rivers of the world are going to stay quietly in their banks so we can cruise them in our boats and barges.\""
"But just as the river that Mark Twain romanced and revered carried the pieces of wrecked houses and trees from floods upstream, so it does a century later -- \"the debris,\" Professor Michaelson said, \"of battlefields between water and man.\""
