"x"
"Beneath this small farm town at the end of whats left of the Kings River, the ground is sinking."
"Going into the fourth year of drought, farmers have pumped so much water that the water table below Stratford fell 100 feet in two years. Land in some spots in the Central Valley has dropped a foot a year."
"In July, the town well cracked in three places. Household pipes spit black mud, then pale yellow water. After that, taps were dry for two weeks while the water district patched the steel well casing."
"In September, the children of migrant farmworkers who usually come back to Stratford School a few weeks late, after the grape harvest, never came back at all."
"By October, there were new faces in the drought relief line in front of the school, picking up boxes of applesauce, canned tomatoes, peanut butter, rice."
"If rain doesnt come soon to California, cities and suburbs will survive, with maybe fewer flower beds or more expensive lettuce."
"But in Stratford  where the school has had some of the same teachers for 40 years,the auto parts store doubles as a coffeehouse and first names change but last names dont  survival isnt a given."
"Even above ground, the town is sinking."
"Arches at both ends of the town square spell out S-T-R-A-T-FO-R-D in the shape of a rainbow. Years ago there was a population sign, but people argue over the last number it gave. There are about 900 people left now."
"The glory days, when the arches were entrances to burger joints and gas stations for Central Valley residents driving to Pismo Beach, faded decades ago."
"But nothing like this, said Josh Orton, manager of the farm equipment store his great-great-grandfather started in 1906. Theres just no water."
"Two doors down at Hardins Grocery, the inventory has evaporated to a puddle of chips, drinks, tobacco and pregnancy tests near the cash register."
"Customers push open the door to the dim store and its empty shelves, hollering Hey ya, Kenny, or  Hola, Kenny over the door chimes."
"Oye, Carnal  hey, dude  the Yemeni store owner with tired eyes answers in Spanish slang."
"His name is Mahmod Alrihimi, but theyve been calling him Kenny for 24 years, ever since he leased the business from Mr. Hardin, who still lives in a trailer behind the grocery. (I dont know why Kenny. Maybe it is easier for them to say?)"
"Each day Alrihimi opens the store at 8 a.m. and closes at 10 p.m. If hes really tired hell go home a half-hour early, but peopleinvariably knock on his door and say, Kenny, can you come out? We just need a bottle of milk."
"He doesnt mind. He likes feeling needed. I really love this town. I know so many families, he said."
"A man put two packages of hot dog buns and a roll of paper towels on the counter."
"Hey, Kenny, OK if I pay for these after Friday? he asked, lowering his voice."
"Alrihimi nodded. But his stomach dropped. This was a man who had never asked for credit before."
"The store owner had 29 receipts that constituted the weeks IOUs. On the backs of two torn-up cigarette cartons, he wrote the running accounts: the ones where they owed $34, paid $12, then charged $8."
"Its too sad to say no. I think of their kids, said Alrihimi, a father of five."
"They dont have any money. I dont have any money. Were all trying to get through, little-by-little-bit."
"When he has to run errands, Darlene Lacey watches the store. Shes been helping out since her husband died 13 years ago."
"Alrihimi worries about her."
"I think that when people cant pay, she takes money out of her own pocket and puts it in the cash register, he said. She is a very good-heart lady. But she has too little money."
"Later that afternoon, when Alrihimi was at the bank, Lacey rang up two sodas for an elderly couple who asked for credit. Then she slipped $2 in the cash register."
"Kenny is hanging on by a thread, she said. And, oh my gosh, our little town needs him."
"Next door at the post office, a wall of boxes have closed stickers over them. They belong to families whove moved or havent paid their bills."
"The lone employee, Rick Kimball, is bending the rules and keeping mail for those still in town. (Theyre working their tails off to get by. Seems like the least I can do.)"
"He likes learning about people by paying attention to their mail."
"The Hamiltons? Nice folks. All the womens first names start with S and all the men are named Tony, he said."
"Johnny Caldeira, 36, picked up a package, then leaned his elbows on the counter to chat."
"Im beginning to feel like a bartender, Kimball, a former parole officer and truck driver, told him."
"Youre the hangout spot now, Caldeira said. There arent any other places left."
"Caldeira went to Stratford School. Most of the classmates he graduated with in eighth grade are still in town."
"Adrian teaches fourth grade, Dannys inthe reserves. The Meyers  George and Charlie  farm, Caldeira said. They just lost their grandfather, old man Meyers. I think he was 100. We just lost Mr. Henry."
"His former seventh-grade teacher, William Henry, persuaded Caldeira to go to college after he returned from the war in Iraq. This month the graduate takes the test for his credentials. He wants to teach in Stratford like the man who pushed him."
"Mr. Henry used to be in the Navy before he was a teacher, so when I came back, I could actually talk to him. He had seen things too."
"At first it was, How you doing? When you going back to school? Then one day he comes in, slams down a college application and says, Now get your ass in school before I kick it. Thats a cleaned-up version. Mr. Henry had a mouth."
"Each spring, the seventh- and eighth-graders still dance around a maypole, and theres always a festa at the Portuguese Hall."
"But its the Constitution Day Parade that is really something to behold, said David Orton, Joshs father."
"A couple of farmers pull kindergartners on flatbed trucks. The Ortons add a tractor and Stratford School Principal Bill Bilbo rides his motorcycle  a crowd favorite."
"There are so many people in the parade that it leaves about 20 people watching, Orton said, shaking with laughter. And the next year, we do it again. This town has a way of holding on."
"The Orton family first came to farm in Stratford in the 1800s, when they got pushed off their Lemoore land by railroad barons."
"Back then, their farm was on the edge of Tulare Lake  the lake that once was. It had been the largest body of fresh water west of the Mississippi, some four and a half times bigger than Lake Tahoe. But the four Sierra rivers that flowed to the lake  the Kings, Kern, Kaweah and Tule  were dammed, diverting water that powerful landowners could own and sell. The tule fog that rises from the ground and blankets the Central Valley in a blinding thickness each winter is said to be a Yokut Indiancurse that the stolen waters shall haunt this place forever."
"The drought is affecting even eternal curses. There seems to be less fog each year. Farmers fear it could hurt the moisture-loving, high-value nut crops that are quickly replacing fields of alfalfa, tomatoes and cotton."
"At the Ortons, they still grow row crops, but they planted only 18 of their 100 acres. Now two wells are out and they dont have water for what they planted."
"Were growing dirt, David Orton said. Its a very popular crop around here right now."
"On a Wednesday morning when the sky was still dawn-pink, Allyson Lemons and JD, her husband of 62 years, walked to the auto parts store. She carried a plate of fresh-baked chocolate chip cookies."
"With all the towns cafes long gone, Chris Rodriques always puts on a pot of coffee athis familys store. On Wednesdays, Allyson and JD bring cookies. Last week it was her cornflake recipe."
"The couple took their place at a long table with floral-patterned dinette chairs, where a group of neighbors had already settled in."
"A couple of farmers read the Wall Street Journal. Dick Newton, 67, stretched out long legs while he checked college football scores in the local paper."
"Newton is one of the old families by dint of his mothers side, who settled in the area in 1905. His fathers family didnt come till 1911."
"They got to chatting about that time when Newton and his brother were water-skiing on the Kings River  there was water in it then  and from the far bank, Newtons brother shot an arrow at one of the Lemons chickens. The arrow went right through the birds neck and carried it to the front porch."
"You remember that? Newton asked."
"Oh, do I, said Allyson Lemons. I heard something. Came to the door. And it landed right at my feet. I cooked it up for dinner."
"The Newton brother who shot the chicken is now farming marijuana on Orcas Island in Washington state, where the crop is legal."
"Newton had a text from a farmer who said that 70% of his crop of pistachios were blanks  no nuts inside."
"No one knew the reason for sure, but when the snows dont come and rain doesnt fall and even the fog thins, things go wrong."
"On the other side of the square, Alrihimi opened for the day. Three years ago hed had a deli in back, with lines of field workers out the door twice a day. Now, he owed so, so much money."
"The other week, a farmer had put a hand on his shoulder and said, Kenny, when the rain comes, the money comes."
"I pray every day the water is coming back, he said. I dont want to leave here."
"He sat on a milk crate in the doorway of the store. Lacey pulled out a crate and joined him in the sunshine of another cloudless day."
