"x"
"The young Egyptian professional could pass for any New York bachelor."
"Dressed in a crisp polo shirt and swathed in cologne, he races his Nissan Maxima through the rain-slicked streets of Manhattan, late for a date with a tall brunette. At red lights, he fusses with his hair."
"What sets the bachelor apart from other young men on the make is the chaperon sitting next to him -- a tall, bearded man in a white robe and stiff embroidered hat."
"\"I pray that Allah will bring this couple together,\" the man, Sheik Reda Shata, says, clutching his seat belt and urging the bachelor to slow down."
"Christian singles have coffee hour. Young Jews have JDate. But many Muslims believe that it is forbidden for an unmarried man and woman to meet in private. In predominantly Muslim countries, the job of making introductions and even arranging marriages typically falls to a vast network of family and friends."
"In Brooklyn, there is Mr. Shata."
"Week after week, Muslims embark on dates with him in tow. Mr. Shata, the imam of a Bay Ridge mosque, juggles some 550 \"marriage candidates,\" from a gold-toothed electrician to a professor at Columbia University. The meetings often unfold on the green velour couch of his office, or over a meal at his favorite Yemeni restaurant on Atlantic Avenue."
"The bookish Egyptian came to America in 2002 to lead prayers, not to dabble in matchmaking. He was far more conversant in Islamic jurisprudence than in matters of the heart. But American imams must wear many hats, none of which come tailor-made."
"Whether issuing American-inspired fatwas or counseling the homesick, fielding questions from the F.B.I. or mediating neighborhood spats, Mr. Shata walks an endless labyrinth of problems."
"If anything seems conquerable, it is the solitude of Muslim singles. Nothing brings the imam more joy than guiding them to marriage. It is his way of fashioning a future for his faith. It is his most heartfelt effort -- by turns graceful and comedic, vexing and hopeful -- to make Islam work in America."
"Word of the imam's talents has traveled far, eliciting lonely calls from Muslims in Chicago and Los Angeles, or from meddlesome parents in Cairo and Damascus."
"From an estimated 250 chaperoned dates, Mr. Shata has produced 10 marriages."
"\"The prophet said whoever brings a man and woman together, it is as if he has worshiped for an entire year,\" said Mr. Shata, 37, speaking through an Arabic translator."
"The task is not easy. In a country of plentiful options, Muslim immigrants can become picky, even rude, the imam complains."
"During one date, a woman studied the red-circled eyes of a prospective husband and asked, \"Have you brought me an alcoholic?\""
"On another occasion, an Egyptian man stared at the flat chest of a pleasant young Moroccan woman and announced, \"She looks like a log!\" the imam recalled."
"\"This would never happen in Egypt,\" said Mr. Shata, turning red at the memory. \"Never, never. If I knew this boy had no manners I never would have let him into my office.\""
"The concept of proper courtship in Islam, like much about the faith, is open to interpretation."
"Islamic law specifies that a man and woman who are unmarried may not be alone in closed quarters. Some Muslims reject any mingling before marriage. Others freely date. Many fall somewhere in between, meeting in groups, getting engaged and spending time alone before the wedding, while their parents look the other way."
"For one Syrian in New York, a date at Starbucks is acceptable if it begins and ends on the premises: The public is his chaperon."
"Mr. Shata is a traditionalist. There were few strangers in his rural town of birth, Kafr al Battikh, in northeastern Egypt. Men and women often agreed to marry the day they met, and a few made the deal sight unseen. It was rare to meet anyone from a distant province, let alone another country."
"New York is not only the capital of the world, imams often joke, but also the crossroads of Islam, a human sampling more diverse than anywhere save Mecca during the annual pilgrimage known as the Hajj. Beyond the city's five boroughs, Muslim immigrants have formed Islamic hubs in California, Illinois, Michigan and Texas."
"At the center of these hubs stands a familiar sight in a foreign land, the mosque. What was a place of worship in Pakistan or Algeria becomes, in Houston or Detroit, a social haven. But inside, the sexes remain largely apart."
"A growing number of Muslim Web sites advertise marriage candidates, and housewives often double as matchmakers. One mosque in Princeton, N.J., plays host to a closely supervised version of speed dating. And so many singles worship at the Islamic Society of Boston that a committee was formed to match them up."
"Fearing a potential surplus of single Muslim women, one Brooklyn imam reportedly urged his wealthier male congregants during a Ramadan sermon last year to take two wives. When a woman complained about the sermon to Mr. Shata, he laughed."
"\"You know that preacher who said Hugo Chvez should be shot?\" he asked. \"We have our idiots, too.\""
"More than a matchmaker, Mr. Shata sees himself as a surrogate elder to young Muslims, many of whom live far from their parents. In America, only an imam is thought to have the connections, wisdom and respect to step into the role."
"Mr. Shata began the service three months after arriving in Brooklyn in 2002, recruited to lead the Islamic Society of Bay Ridge, a mosque on Fifth Avenue."
"Dates chaperoned by Mr. Shata -- or \"meetings between candidates,\" as the imam prefers to call them -- often take place in his distinctly unromantic office, amid rows of Islamic texts. As a couple get acquainted, the imam sits quietly at his desk, writing a sermon or surfing the Arabic Web sites of CNN and the BBC."
"If there is an awkward silence, the imam perks up and asks a question (\"So tell me, Ilham, how many siblings do you have?\") and the conversation is moving again."
"Candidates are vetted carefully, and those without personal references need not apply. But instinct is Mr. Shata's best guide. He refused to help a Saudi from California because the man would consider only a teenage wife. Others have shown an all-too-keen interest in a green card."
"Those who pass initial inspection are listed in the imam's version of a little black book -- their names, phone numbers, specifications and desires. Some prefer \"silky hair,\" others \"a virgin.\" Nearly all candidates, men and women alike, want a mate with devotion to Islam, decent looks and legal immigration status."
"Scanning the book, the imam makes his pitch with the precision of a car salesman."
"\"There is a girl, an American convert, Dominican, looks a little Egyptian. Skin-wise, not white, not dark. Wheat-colored. She's 19, studies accounting,\" Mr. Shata told a 24-year-old Palestinian man one afternoon."
"\"This is my only choice?\" replied the man, Yamal Othman, who lives in Queens."
"Such questions annoy Mr. Shata. An imam, he says, should be trusted to select the best candidate. Often, though, his recommendations are met with skepticism."
"\"It's harder than choosing a diamond,\" said Mr. Shata."
"Sometimes, on the imam's three-legged dates, no one seems more excited than Mr. Shata himself. He makes hurried, hearty introductions and then steps back to watch, as if mixing chemicals in a lab experiment. Love is rarely ignited, but the imam remains awed by its promise."
"Mr. Shata discovered love 15 years ago, when he walked into the living room of the most stately house in Kafr al Battikh."
"The imam was tall, 22, a rising star at the local mosque. For months, Omyma Elshabrawy knew only his voice. She would listen to his thunderous sermons from the women's section, out of view. Then, one evening, he appeared at her home, presented as a prospective groom to her father, a distinguished reciter of the Koran."
"The young woman, then 20, walked toward Mr. Shata carrying a tray of lemonade."
"\"She entered my heart,\" said the imam."
"After serving the drinks, she disappeared. Right then, Mr. Shata asked her father for her hand in marriage. The older man paused. His daughter was the town beauty, an English student with marriage offers from doctors. The imam was penniless."
"But before Mr. Elshabrawy could respond, a sugary voice interrupted. \"I accept,\" his daughter said from behind a door."
"\"I loved him from the moment I saw him,\" Ms. Elshabrawy said."
"They now have four children."
"The family posed last year for a Sears-style portrait, taken by a woman in Bay Ridge who photographs Muslim families in her basement. A blue sky and white picket fence adorn the background. The imam sits at center, with the baby, Mohammed, in his lap, his three daughters smiling, his wife wrapped in a lime-green hijab."
"Mr. Shata carries the picture in the breast pocket of his robe. It is as close as most people get to his family. At the mosque, they are a mystery. His wife has been there twice."
"Their years in America have come with great hardship, a subject the imam rarely discusses. The trouble is the illness of his 7-year-old daughter, Rawda, who is severely epileptic. She has dozens of seizures every day and rarely leaves home. No combination of medicine seems to help."
"\"Rawda is the wound in my heart,\" the imam said."
"Mr. Shata offers long, stubborn theories about the value of marriage, but to observe him at home is to understand the commitment he seeks to foster in other Muslims."
"The family lives in a spare, dimly lighted apartment two blocks from the mosque. Headscarves are piled over Pokmon cards. The gold-painted words \"Allah is Great\" are framed over a threadbare couch. In the next room, an \"I {sheart} New York\" bumper sticker is slapped on the wall."
"Mr. Shata spends long hours away from his family, lecturing at mosques, settling disputes, whispering the call to prayer in the ears of newborn babies. On his walk home at night, he shops for groceries, never forgetting the Honey Nut Cheerios, a favorite American discovery of his children."
"When he walks in the door, his face softens. Loud kisses are planted on tender cheeks. Mohammed squeals, the girls smile, sweet laughter echoes."
"But then there is Rawda."
"\"My beautiful girl,\" the imam says softly one evening, holding his limp daughter in his lap after a seizure has passed. He places one pill in Rawda's mouth, then another. She looks at him weakly."
"\"There we go,\" he whispers. \"Inshallah.\""
"Her lids close with sleep. He lays her in bed and shuts off the light."
"Hardship, the imam believes -- like marriage, like life -- is a test from God."
"It is proof of the imam's uncommon popularity among women that he is trusted with roughly 300 female marriage candidates."
"The mosque on Fifth Avenue is a decidedly male place. Men occupy every position on the board of directors. They crowd the sidewalk after prayer. Only they may enter the mosque's central room of worship. Only men, they often point out, are required to attend the Friday prayer."
"One floor below is the cramped room where the women worship. On Fridays, they sit pressed together, their headscarves itching with heat. They must watch their imam on a closed-circuit television that no one seems to have adjusted in years."
"But they listen devotedly. Teenage girls often roll their eyes at foreign imams, who seem to them like extraterrestrials. Their immigrant mothers often find these clerics too strict, an uncomfortable reminder of their conservative homelands."
"Mr. Shata is both foreign and familiar. He presides over a patriarchal world, sometimes upholding it, and other times challenging it. In one sermon, he said that a man was in charge of his home and had the right to \"choose his wife's friends.\""
"Another day, to the consternation of his male congregants, he invited a female Arab social worker to lecture on domestic violence. The women were allowed to sit next to the men in the main section of the mosque."
"The imam frowns at career women who remain single in their 30's, but boasts of their accomplishments to interest marriage candidates. He employs his own brand of feminism, vetting marriage contracts closely to ensure brides receive a fair dowry and fighting for them when they don't."
"Far more than is customary, he spends hours listening to women: to their worries and confessions, their intimate secrets and frank questions about everything from menstruation to infidelity. They line up outside his office and call his home at all hours, often referring to him as \"my brother\" or \"father.\" He can summon the details of their lives with the same encyclopedic discipline he once used to memorize the Koran."
"\"Are you separated yet?\" Mr. Shata asked a woman he encountered at Lutheran Medical Center one day last July. She nodded. \"May God make it easier for you,\" he said."
"By most standards, the Egyptian bachelor was a catch. He had broad shoulders and a playful smile. He was witty. He earned a comfortable salary as an engineer, and came from what he called \"a good family.\""
"But the imam saw him differently, as a young man in danger of losing his faith. The right match might save him."
"The bachelor, who is 33, came to Brooklyn from Alexandria, Egypt, six years earlier. He craved a better salary, and freedom from controlling parents. He asked that his name not be printed for fear of causing embarrassment to his family."
"America was not like Egypt, where his family's connections could secure a good job. In Brooklyn, he found work as a busboy. He traded the plush comfort of his parents' home for an apartment crowded with other Egyptian immigrants. His nights were lonely. Temptation was abundant."
"Women covered far less of their bodies. Bare limbs, it seemed, were everywhere. In Islam, men are instructed to lower their gaze to avoid falling into sin."
"\"In the summertime, it's a disaster for us,\" said the bachelor. \"Especially a guy like me, who's looking all the time.\""
"Curiosity lured him into bars, clubs and the occasional one-night stand."
"But with freedom came guilt, he said. After drifting from his faith, he visited Mr. Shata's mosque during Ramadan in 2004."
"The imam struck him as oddly disarming. He made jokes, and explained Islam in simple, passionate paragraphs. The bachelor soon began praying daily, attending weekly lectures and reading the Koran. By then, he had his own apartment and a consulting job."
"Now he wanted a Muslim wife."
"If the bachelor had been in Egypt, his parents would offer a stream of marriage candidates. The distance had not stopped them entirely. His mother sent him a video of his brother's wedding, directing him to footage of a female guest. He was unimpressed."
"\"I'm a handsome guy,\" he explained one evening as he sped toward Manhattan. It was his second date with Mr. Shata in attendance. \"I have a standard in beauty.\""
"From the passenger seat, the imam flipped open the glove compartment to find an assortment of pricey colognes. He inspected a bottle of Gio and, with a nod from the bachelor, spritzed it over his robe."
"The imam and the bachelor were at odds over the material world, but on one thing they agreed: it is a Muslim duty to smell good. The religion's founder, the Prophet Muhammad, was said to wear musk."
"The car slowed before a brick high-rise on Second Avenue. Soon the pair rode up in the elevator. The bachelor took a breath and rang the doorbell. An older woman answered. Behind her stood a slender, fetching woman with a shy smile."
"The young woman, Engy Abdelkader, had been presented to the imam by another matchmaker. A woman of striking beauty and poise, Ms. Abdelkader is less timid than she first seems. She works as an immigration and human rights lawyer, and speaks in forceful, eloquent bursts. She is proud of her faith, and lectures publicly on Islam and civil liberties."
"She was not always so outspoken. The daughter of Egyptian immigrants, Ms. Abdelkader, 30, was raised in suburban Howell, N.J., where she longed to fit in. Though she grew up praying, in high school she chose not to wear a hijab, the head scarf donned by Muslim girls when they reach puberty."
"But Sept. 11 awakened her, Ms. Abdelkader said. For her and other Muslims, the terrorist attacks prompted a return to the faith, driven by what she said was a need to reclaim Islam from terrorists and a vilifying media. Headscarves became a statement, equal parts political and religious."
"\"There's nothing oppressive about it,\" said Ms. Abdelkader. \"As a Muslim woman I am asking people to pay attention to the content of my character rather than my physical appearance.\""
"The pair sat on a couch, awkwardly sipping tea. They began by talking, in English, about their professions. The bachelor was put off by the fact that Ms. Abdelkader had a law degree, yet earned a modest salary."
"\"Why go to law school and not make money?\" he asked later."
"Ms. Abdelkader's mother and a female friend who lived in the apartment sat listening nearby until the imam mercifully distracted them. The first hint of trouble came soon after."
"It was his dream, the engineer told Ms. Abdelkader, to buy a half-million-dollar house. But he was uncertain that the mortgage he would need is lawful in Islam."
"Ms. Abdelkader straightened her back and replied, \"I would rather have eternal bliss in the hereafter than live in a house or apartment with a mortgage.\""
"An argument ensued. Voices rose. Ms. Abdelkader's mother took her daughter's side. The friend wavered. The bachelor held his ground. The imam tried to mediate."
"Indeed, he was puzzled. Here was a woman who had grown up amid tended lawns and new cars, yet she rejected materialism. And here was a man raised by Muslim hands, yet he was rebelliously moderate."
"After the date, the bachelor told the imam, \"I want a woman, not a sheik.\""
"Months later, he married another immigrant; she was not especially devoted to Islam but she made him laugh, he said. They met through friends in New York."
"Ms. Abdelkader remains single. The imam still believes she was the perfect match."
"That evening, the imam stood on the sidewalk outside. Rain fell in stinging drops."
"\"I never wanted to be a sheik,\" he said. \"I used to think that a religious person is very extreme and never smiles. And I love to smile. I love to laugh. I used to think that religious people were isolated and I love to be among people.\""
"The rain soaked the imam's robe and began to pool in his sandals. A moment later, he ducked inside the building."
"\"The surprise for me was that the qualities I thought would not make a good sheik -- simplicity and humor and being close to people -- those are the most important qualities. People love those who smile and laugh. They need someone who lives among them and knows their pain.\""
"\"I know them,\" said Mr. Shata. \"Like a brother.\""
