"x"
"\"I'm pretty,\" said Mr. Bannock, who is 6 feet tall and weighs 300 pounds. \"And baby, when I walk out that door there ain't nothing cheap on me.\""
"Most days, this 46-year-old black man is a carpenter, welder and handyman, but on Mardi Gras morning he is a Big Chief, one of the celebrated -- if incongruous -- black Indians of Carnival. He is an important man."
"Sometime around 11 A.M. on Feb. 28, Mr. Bannock will step from his house in a resplendent, flamboyant turquoise costume complete with a towering headdress, and people in the largely black and poor 16th and 17th Wards, the area known as Gert Town, will shout, cheer and follow him through the streets, dancing, drumming and singing."
"\"That's my glory,\" he said. Like the other Big Chiefs, he calls it his \"mornin' glory.\""
"He is one of the standard-bearers of a uniquely New Orleans tradition. The Big Chiefs dance, sing and stage mock battles -- wars of words and rhymes -- to honor American Indians who once gave sanctuary to escaped slaves. It is an intense but elegant posturing, a street theater that some black men devote a lifetime to."
"But this ceremony is also self-affirmation, the way poor blacks in New Orleans honor their own culture in a Carnival season that might otherwise pass them by, said the Big Chiefs who carry on the tradition, and the academics who study it."
"These Indians march mostly in neighborhoods where the tourists do not go, ride on the hoods of dented Chevrolets instead of floats, and face off on street corners where poverty and violence grip the people most of the rest of the year. The escape is temporary, but it is escape."
"\"They say Rex is ruler,\" said Mr. Bannock, referring to the honorary title given to the king of Carnival, often a celebrity, who will glide through crowds of tourists and local revelers astride an elaborate float. \"But not in the 17th Ward. 'Cause I'm the king here. This is our thing."
"\"The drums will be beating and everybody will be hollering and\" -- he paused to stab the needle through a mosaic of beads and canvas -- \"and it sounds like all my people's walking straight through hell.\""
"A man does not need an Oldsmobile, with or without a bumper, if he can walk on air. Lifted there by the spirit of his neighborhood, it is his duty to face down the other Big Chiefs, to cut them down with words instead of bullets and straight razors, the way the Indians used to settle their disagreements in Mardi Gras in the early 1900s. Mr. Bannock, shot in the thigh by a jealous old chief in 1981, appears to be the last to have been wounded in battle."
"\"I forgave him,\" Mr. Bannock said."
"The tribes have names like the Yellow Pocahontas, White Eagles, the Golden Star Hunters and the Wild Magnolias. The Big Chiefs are not born, but work their way up through the ranks. Only the best sewers and singers become Big Chiefs."
"By tradition, the chiefs must sew their own costumes, and must do a new costume from scratch each year. Mr. Bannock's fingers are scarred from a lifetime of it. His right index finger is a mass of old punctures. Some men cripple themselves, through puncture wounds or repetitive motion, and have to retire. The costumes can cost $5,000 or more, a lot of cash in Gert Town."
"The rhythms of their celebration, despite their feathered headdresses, seem more West African or Haitian than Indian, and the words are from the bad streets of the Deep South. Mr. Bannock said that no matter what the ceremony's origins, it belongs to New Orleans now. The battle chants have made their way into popular New Orleans music. The costumes hang in museums."
"\"Maybe it don't make no sense, and it ain't worth anything,\" said Mr. Bannock. But one day a year he leads his neighborhood on a hard, forced march to respect, doing battle at every turn with other chiefs who are out trying to do the same."
"Jimmy Ricks is a 34-year-old concrete finisher most of the year, but on Mardi Gras morning he is a Spy Boy, the man who goes out ahead of the Big Chief searching for other chiefs. He is in love with the tradition, he said, because of what it means to people here."
"\"It still amazes me,\" he said, how on Mardi Gras mornings the people from the neighborhood drift over to Mr. Bannock's little house on Edinburgh Street and wait for a handyman to lead them."
"\"To understand it, you got to let your heart wander,\" said Mr. Bannock, who leads the Golden Star Hunters. \"All I got to do is peek through my needle.\""
"I'm 52 inches across my chest
And I don't bow to nothin'
'Cept God and death
-- from a battle chant by Larry Bannock"
"The more exclusive party within the party -- the grand balls and societies that underlie the reeling, alcohol-soaked celebration that is Carnival -- have always been By Invitation Only."
"The origins of Carnival, which climaxes with Mardi Gras, or Fat Tuesday, are found in the Christian season of celebration before Lent. In New Orleans the celebration reaches back more than 150 years, to loosely organized parades in the 1830s. One of the oldest Carnival organizations, the Mystick Krewe of Comus, staged the first organized parade. Today, Mardi Gras is not one parade but several, including that of the traditional Zulus, a black organization. But Comus, on Fat Tuesday, is still king."
"The krewes were -- some still are -- secret societies. The wealthier whites and Creoles, many of whom are descendants of people of color who were free generations before the Civil War, had balls and parades, while poorer black men and women cooked the food and parked the cars."
"Mardi Gras had no other place for them, said Dr. Frederick Stielow, director of Tulane University's Amistad Research Center, the largest minority archive in the nation. And many of these poorer blacks still are not part of the party, he said."
"\"These are people who were systematically denigrated,\" said Dr. Stielow, who has studied the Mardi Gras Indians for years. So they made their own party, \"a separate reality,\" he said, to the hard work, racism and stark poverty."
"It might have been a Buffalo Bill Wild West Show that gave them the idea to dress as Indians, Dr. Stielow said, but either way the first \"Indian Tribes\" appeared in the late 1800s. They said they wore feathers as a show of affinity from one oppressed group to another, and to thank the Louisiana Indians for sanctuary in the slave days."
"By the Great Depression these tribes, or \"gangs\" as they are now called, used Mardi Gras as an excuse to seek revenge on enemies and fought bloody battles, said the man who might be the biggest chief of all, 72-year-old Tootie Montana. He has been one for 46 years."
"Mr. Bannock said, \"They used to have a saying, 'Kiss your wife, hug your momma, sharpen your knife, and load your pistol.' \""
"Even after the violence faded into posturing, the New Orleans Police Department continued to break up the Indian gatherings. Mr. Bannock said New Orleans formally recognized the Indians' right to a tiny piece of Mardi Gras just two years ago."
"Shoo fly, don't bother me
Shoo fly, don't bother me
If it wasn't for the warden and them lowdown hounds
I'd be in New Orleans 'fore the sun go down
-- Big Chief's battle chant, written by a chief while in the state prison in Angola"
"They speak a language as mysterious as any white man's krewe."
"In addition to Spy Boys, there are Flag Boys -- the flag bearers -- and Second Line, the people, sometimes numbering in the hundreds, who follow the chiefs from confrontation to confrontation."
"They march -- more of a dance, really -- from Downtown, Uptown, even across the river in the poor black sections of Algiers -- until the Big Chiefs meet at the corner of Claiborne and Orleans Avenues and, inside a madhouse circle of onlookers, lash each other with words. Sometimes people almost faint from the strain."
"But it is mainly with the costume itself that a man does battle, said Mr. Montana. The breastplates are covered with intricate pictures of Indian scenes, painstakingly beaded by hand. The feathers are brilliant yellows, blues, reds and greens."
"The winner is often \"the prettiest,\" Mr. Montana said, and that is usually him."
"\"I am the oldest, I am the best, and I am the prettiest,\" he said."
"A few are well-off businessmen, at least one has served time in prison, but most are people who sweat for a living, like him."
"Some chiefs do not make their own costumes, but pay to have them made -- what Mr. Bannock calls \"Drugstore Indians.\" Of the 20 or so people who call themselves Big Chiefs, only a few remain true to tradition."
"Mr. Bannock sits and sweats in his house, working day and night with his needle. He has never had time for a family. He lives for Fat Tuesday."
"\"I need my mornin' glory,\" he said."
"A few years ago he had a heart attack, but did not have time to die. He had 40 yards of velvet to cut and sew."
"Before the dust and the rage had a chance to settle, a chilly rain started to fall on the blasted-out wreck of what had once been an office building, and on the shoulders of the small army of police, firefighters and medical technicians that surrounded it."
"They were not used to this, if anyone is. On any other day, they would have answered calls to kitchen fires, domestic disputes, or even a cat up a tree. Oklahoma City is still, in some ways, a small town, said the people who live here."
"This morning, as the blast trembled the morning coffee in cups miles away, the outside world came crashing hard onto Oklahoma City."
"\"I just took part in a surgery where a little boy had part of his brain hanging out of his head,\" said Terry Jones, a medical technician, as he searched in his pocket for a cigarette. Behind him, firefighters picked carefully through the skeleton of the building, still searching for the living and the dead."
"\"You tell me,\" he said, \"how can anyone have so little respect for human life.\""
"The shock of what the rescuers found in the rubble had long since worn off, replaced with a loathing for the people who had planted the bomb that killed their friends, neighbors and children."
"One by one they said the same thing: this does not happen here. It happens in countries so far away, so different, they might as well be on the dark side of the moon. It happens in New York. It happens in Europe."
"It does not happen in a place where, debarking at the airport, passengers see a woman holding a sign that welcomes them to the Lieutenant Governor's annual turkey shoot."
"It does not happen in a city that has a sign just outside the city limits, \"Oklahoma City, Home of Vince Gill,\" the country singer."
"\"We're just a little old cowtown,\" said Bill Finn, a grime-covered firefighter who propped himself wearily up against a brick wall as the rain turned the dust to mud on his face. \"You can't get no more Middle America than Oklahoma City. You don't have terrorism in Middle America.\""
"But it did happen here, in such a loathsome way."
"Whatever kind of bomb it was -- a crater just outside the building suggests a car bomb -- it was intended to murder on a grand scale: women, children, old people coming to complain about their Social Security checks."
"The destruction was almost concave in nature, shattering the building from the center, almost front to back, the blast apparently weakening as it spread to both sides of the structure. Blood-stained glass littered the inside. So complete was the destruction that panels and signs from offices several stories up were shattered on the ground floor."
"People could not stop looking at it, particularly the second floor, where a child care center had been."
"\"A whole floor,\" said Randy Woods, a firefighter with Engine No. 7. \"A whole floor of innocents. Grown-ups, you know, they deserve a lot of the stuff they get. But why the children? What did the children ever do to anybody.\""
"Everywhere observers looked, there were the discarded gloves, some blood-stained, of the medical workers."
"There seemed to be very little whole inside the lower floors of the building, only pieces -- pieces of desks, desktop computers and in one place what appeared to be the pieces of plastic toy animals, perhaps from the child care center, perhaps just some of those goofy little things grown-ups keep on their desks."
"Much of it was covered in a fine powder, almost like ash, from the concrete that was not just broken, but blasted into dust. One firefighter said he picked through the big and small pieces almost afraid to move them, afraid of what he would find underneath. Here and there, in a droplet or a smear, was blood."
"One woman, one of many trapped by rubble, had to have her leg amputated before she could be freed. Earlier in the morning, firefighters had heard voices drifting out from behind concrete and twisted metal, people they could hear but could not get to."
"A few blocks away, Jason Likens, a medical technician, wondered aloud how anyone could have walked away unhurt. \"I didn't expect to find anybody living,\" he said."
"He was sickened by what he saw, but did not know who to hate."
"\"I would get mad, but I don't know who to get mad at,\" he said."
"Next door, a group of grim-faced medical technicians, police and others gathered just outside the foyer of a church, not to pray, but to watch over the dead that had been temporarily laid inside in black body bags."
"The stained-glass windows of the brick building had been partly blasted out, with a few scenes hanging in jagged pieces from the frames, but it was still the most peaceful place for blocks."
"\"I hope this opens people's eyes,\" Mr. Woods, the firefighter, said. What he meant was, it should show people everywhere that there really is no safe place, if a terrorist is fanatical enough."
"Like others, he believes it was intended to send a message to the United States: not even your heartland is safe."
"A few blocks away, two elderly women slowly made their way up the street, their faces and clothes bloody."
"They are retirees, living in an apartment building next door to the office building that was the target of the explosion. Phyllis Graham and Allene Craig had felt safe there. But this morning, as the glass went flying through their home, life changed forever."
"\"It all just came apart,\" Ms. Craig said. It was not clear if she meant her building, or something else."
"The case of a lifetime is closed for Howard Wells. The reporters and the well-wishers have begun to drift away, leaving the Union County Sheriff at peace. He will try to do a little fishing when the police radio is quiet, or just sit with his wife, Wanda, and talk of anything but the murderer Susan Smith."
"It bothers him a little that he told a lie to catch her, but he can live with the way it all turned out. Mrs. Smith has been sentenced to life in prison."
"Still, now and then his mind drifts back to nine days last autumn, and he thinks how it might have gone if he had been clumsy, if he had mishandled it. It leaves him a little cold."
"For those nine days -- from Mrs. Smith's drowning of her two little boys on Oct. 25 until she finally confessed on Nov. 3 -- he handled her like a piece of glass, afraid her brittle psyche would shatter and leave him with the jagged edges of a case that might go unsolved for weeks, months or forever."
"\"Susan was all we had,\" Sheriff Wells said, sitting in his living room the other day with a sweating glass of ice tea in his hand. If he had lost her to suicide, or to madness, because he had pushed too hard, there would have been nowhere else to turn. There had been no accomplices, no confidants, no paper trails."
"The manhunt for the fictitious young black man she had accused of taking her children in a carjacking would have continued. The bodies of the boys would have continued to rest at the bottom of nearby John D. Long Lake, under 18 feet of water. The people of the county would have been left to wonder, blame and hate, divided by race and opinion over what truly happened the night she gave her babies to the lake."
"Even if the car had been found, it would have yielded no proof, no clues, that everything had not happened just as she said, Mr. Wells continued. He would have been left not only with the unsolved crime but also with the burden of having driven a distraught and -- for all anyone would know -- innocent woman to suicide at the age of 23."
"Mr. Wells says he has no doubt that he and other investigators walked a tightrope with Mrs. Smith's mental state and that as the inquiry closed around her, she planned to kill herself. For nine days she lived in a hell of her own making, surrounded by weeping, doting relatives she had betrayed in the worst way. \"She had no one to turn to,\" he said."
"So although he was her hunter, he also became the person she could lean on, rely on, trust. But unlike Mrs. Smith, he had no way of knowing that the boys were already dead, had no way of knowing that they were not locked in a car or a closet, freezing, starving."
"Someday the Smith case will be in law-enforcement textbooks. The Federal Bureau of Investigation has already asked Mr. Wells to put down in writing the procedures he used in the case, as well as any useful anecdotes from it."
"But the story of how he, with the help of others, was able to bring the investigation to a close in little more than a week begins not with anything he did but with who he is."
"Mr. Wells, 43, is the antithesis of the redneck Southern sheriff. He has deer heads mounted on his wall but finished at the top of his class in the F.B.I. Academy's training course. He collects guns but quotes Supreme Court decisions off the top of his head."
"\"I'm not a smart fellow,\" he said. But tell that to the people who work for him and around him, and they just roll their eyes. When the attention of the nation turned to Union in those nine days last fall, and in much of the nine months since, \"we were lucky he was here,\" said Hugh Munn, a spokesman for the State Department of Law Enforcement."
"People in the county say they like him because he is one of them. He knows what it feels like to work eight hours a day in the nerve-straining clatter and roar of the textile mills that dominate Union's economy: after high school, he worked blue-collar jobs until he was hired by the town's police force at the age of 23."
"He went on to be a deputy in the county Sheriff's Department. Then, for several years, he stalked poachers and drug peddlers as an agent with the State Wildlife and Marine Resources Division."
"When his brother-in-law quit as Sheriff in 1992, Mr. Wells himself ran, as a 10-to-1 underdog. He promised not to operate under a good ol' boy system of favors gained and owed, and white voters and black voters liked his plain-spokenness and the fact that he was neither backslapper nor backscratcher."
"He won, by just 10 votes."
"His mother, Julia Mae, was then in the hospital dying of cancer. She had lain there unmoving for hours but opened her eyes when he walked in after the election."
"\"Who won?\" she asked."
"His father, John, has Lou Gehrig's disease, and every day Mr. Wells goes by to care for him. The Sheriff went without sleep when the Susan Smith saga began on Oct. 25 but did not skip his visits to his father."
"The Wellses have no children. Wanda suffered a miscarriage a few years ago, so they have become godparents to children of friends and neighbors. The Smith case pitted a man who wants children against a woman who threw hers away."
"His investigation had to take two tracks. One, using hundreds of volunteers and a national crime computer web, operated on the theory that Mrs. Smith was telling the truth. The other, the one that would build a bond between a weeping mother and a doubting Sheriff, focused on her."
"Mr. Wells says Mrs. Smith never imagined, would never have believed, that the disappearance of her children would bring in the F.B.I., the state police, national news organizations. He thinks that when she concocted her story, she believed that the loss of the boys would pass like any other local crime."
"Like other investigators, he was suspicious of her early on. As he talked to her only minutes after she had reported her children missing, he asked her whether the carjacker had done anything to her sexually. She smiled."
"It would be months before the comprehensive history of her troubled life, of suicide attempts, sexual molestation, deep depression and affairs with married men, including her own stepfather, became known. But as bits and pieces of it fell from her lips during questioning, and as cracks appeared in her already unstable mental state, Mr. Wells began to realize that Mrs. Smith, and the case, could come apart in his hands."
"He had to hold her together even as he and other investigators picked her story apart, had to coax and soothe and even pray beside her, until he sensed that the time was right to confront her and try to trick her into confessing."
"And he had to shield her from others, who might push too hard. Once, on Oct. 27, a state agent accused her outright. She cursed loudly and stormed away."
"After that, the people who had contact with her were limited. With the assistance of Pete Logan, a warm, grandfatherly former F.B.I. agent now with the state police, Mr. Wells asked for her help in finding the boys, but did not accuse her."
"The whole time, her family, her hometown and much of America were following her story, sharing her agony."
"\"She couldn't turn to her family, she couldn't ask for an attorney,\" said Mr. Wells. \"She painted herself into a corner where no one could help her.\""
"On Nov. 3, he told her, gently, that he knew she was lying, that by coincidence his own deputies had been undercover on a narcotics case at the same crossroad where she said her babies had been stolen, and at the same time, and that the officers had seen nothing. Actually there had been no such stakeout."
"He prayed with her again, holding her hands, and she confessed. \"I had a problem telling the lie,\" he said as his story unfolded in his living room the other day. \"But if that's what it takes, I'd do it again.\""
"After the confession was signed, as she sat slumped over in her chair, there was still one thing he had to know."
"\"Susan,\" he asked, \"how would all this have played out?\""
"\"I was going to write you a letter,\" she said, \"and kill myself.\""
"He feels sorry for her, and is disgusted by the men who used her and in their own ways contributed to the tragedy. But he is not surprised that a 23-year-old mill secretary could fool the whole nation, at least for a little while."
"\"Susan Smith is smart in every area,\" he said, \"except life.\""
"Oseola McCarty spent a lifetime making other people look nice. Day after day, for most of her 87 years, she took in bundles of dirty clothes and made them clean and neat for parties she never attended, weddings to which she was never invited, graduations she never saw."
"She had quit school in the sixth grade to go to work, never married, never had children and never learned to drive because there was never any place in particular she wanted to go. All she ever had was the work, which she saw as a blessing. Too many other black people in rural Mississippi did not have even that."
"She spent almost nothing, living in her old family home, cutting the toes out of shoes if they did not fit right and binding her ragged Bible with Scotch tape to keep Corinthians from falling out. Over the decades, her pay -- mostly dollar bills and change -- grew to more than $150,000."
"\"More than I could ever use,\" Miss McCarty said the other day without a trace of self-pity. So she is giving her money away, to finance scholarships for black students at the University of Southern Mississippi here in her hometown, where tuition is $2,400 a year."
"\"I wanted to share my wealth with the children,\" said Miss McCarty, whose only real regret is that she never went back to school. \"I never minded work, but I was always so busy, busy. Maybe I can make it so the children don't have to work like I did.\""
"People in Hattiesburg call her donation the Gift. She made it, in part, in anticipation of her death."
"As she sat in her warm, dark living room, she talked of that death matter-of-factly, the same way she talked about the possibility of an afternoon thundershower. To her, the Gift was a preparation, like closing the bedroom windows to keep the rain from blowing in on the bedspread."
"\"I know it won't be too many years before I pass on,\" she said, \"and I just figured the money would do them a lot more good than it would me.\""
"Her donation has piqued interest around the nation. In a few short days, Oseola McCarty, the washerwoman, has risen from obscurity to a notice she does not understand. She sits in her little frame house, just blocks from the university, and patiently greets the reporters, business leaders and others who line up outside her door."
"\"I live where I want to live, and I live the way I want to live,\" she said. \"I couldn't drive a car if I had one. I'm too old to go to college. So I planned to do this. I planned it myself.\""
"It has been only three decades since the university integrated. \"My race used to not get to go to that college,\" she said. \"But now they can.\""
"When asked why she had picked this university instead of a predominantly black institution, she said, \"Because it's here; it's close.\""
"While Miss McCarty does not want a building named for her or a statue in her honor, she would like one thing in return: to attend the graduation of a student who made it through college because of her gift. \"I'd like to see it,\" she said."
"Business leaders in Hattiesburg, 110 miles northeast of New Orleans, plan to match her $150,000, said Bill Pace, the executive director of the University of Southern Mississippi Foundation, which administers donations to the school."
"\"I've been in the business 24 years now, in private fund raising,\" Mr. Pace said. \"And this is the first time I've experienced anything like this from an individual who simply was not affluent, did not have the resources and yet gave substantially. In fact, she gave almost everything she has."
"\"No one approached her from the university; she approached us. She's seen the poverty, the young people who have struggled, who need an education. She is the most unselfish individual I have ever met.\""
"Although some details are still being worked out, the $300,000 -- Miss McCarty's money and the matching sum -- will finance scholarships into the indefinite future. The only stipulation is that the beneficiaries be black and live in southern Mississippi."
"The college has already awarded a $1,000 scholarship in Miss McCarty's name to an 18-year-old honors student from Hattiesburg, Stephanie Bullock."
"Miss Bullock's grandmother, Ledrester Hayes, sat in Miss McCarty's tiny living room the other day and thanked her. Later, when Miss McCarty left the room, Mrs. Hayes shook her head in wonder."
"\"I thought she would be some little old rich lady with a fine car and a fine house and clothes,\" she said. \"I was a seamstress myself, worked two jobs. I know what it's like to work like she did, and she gave it away.\""
"The Oseola McCarty Scholarship Fund bears the name of a woman who bought her first air-conditioner just three years ago and even now turns it on only when company comes. Miss McCarty also does not mind that her tiny black-and-white television set gets only one channel, because she never watches anyway. She complains that her electricity bill is too high and says she never subscribed to a newspaper because it cost too much."
"The pace of Miss McCarty's walks about the neighborhood is slowed now, and she misses more Sundays than she would like at Friendship Baptist Church. Arthritis has left her hands stiff and numb. For the first time in almost 80 years, her independence is threatened."
"\"Since I was a child, I've been working,\" washing the clothes of doctors, lawyers, teachers, police officers, she said. \"But I can't do it no more. I can't work like I used to.\""
"She is 5 feet tall and would weigh 100 pounds with rocks in her pockets. Her voice is so soft that it disappears in the squeak of the screen door and the hum of the air-conditioner."
"She comes from a wide place in the road called Shubuta, Miss., a farming town outside Meridian, not far from the Alabama line. She quit school, she said, when the grandmother who reared her became ill and needed care."
"\"I would have gone back,\" she said, \"but the people in my class had done gone on, and I was too big. I wanted to be with my class.\""
"So she worked, and almost every dollar went into the bank. In time, all her immediate family died. \"And I didn't have nobody,\" she said. \"But I stayed busy.\""
"She took a short vacation once, as a young woman, to Niagara Falls. The roar of the water scared her. \"Seemed like the world was coming to an end,\" she said."
"She stayed home, mostly, after that. She has lived alone since 1967."
"Earlier this year her banker asked what she wanted done with her money when she passed on. She told him that she wanted to give it to the university, now rather than later; she set aside just enough to live on."
"She says she does not want to depend on anyone after all these years, but she may have little choice. She has been informally adopted by the first young person whose life was changed by her gift."
"As a young woman, Stephanie Bullock's mother wanted to go to the University of Southern Mississippi. But that was during the height of the integration battles, and if she had tried her father might have lost his job with the city."
"It looked as if Stephanie's own dream of going to the university would also be snuffed out, for lack of money. Although she was president of her senior class in high school and had grades that were among the best there, she fell just short of getting an academic scholarship. Miss Bullock said her family earned too much money to qualify for most Federal grants but not enough to send her to the university."
"Then, last week, she learned that the university was giving her $1,000, in Miss McCarty's name. \"It was a total miracle,\" she said, \"and an honor.\""
"She visited Miss McCarty to thank her personally and told her that she planned to \"adopt\" her. Now she visits regularly, offering to drive Miss McCarty around and filling a space in the tiny woman's home that has been empty for decades."
"She feels a little pressure, she concedes, not to fail the woman who helped her. \"I was thinking how amazing it was that she made all that money doing laundry,\" said Miss Bullock, who plans to major in business."
"She counts on Miss McCarty's being there four years from now, when she graduates."
"Grant Cooper knows he lives in prison, but there are days when he cannot remember why. His crimes flit in and out of his memory like flies through a hole in a screen door, so that sometimes his mind and conscience are blank and clean."
"He used to be a drinker and a drifter who had no control over his rage. In 1978, in an argument with a man in a bread line at the Forgotten Man Ministry in Birmingham, Ala., his hand automatically slid into his pants pocket for a knife."
"He cut the man so quick and deep that he died before his body slipped to the floor. Mr. Cooper had killed before, in 1936 and in 1954, so the judge gave him life. Back then, before he needed help to go to the bathroom, Mr. Cooper was a dangerous man."
"Now he is 77, and since his stroke in 1993 he mostly just lies in his narrow bunk at the Hamilton Prison for the Aged and Infirm, a blue blanket hiding the tubes that run out of his bony body. Sometimes the other inmates put him in a wheelchair and park him in the sun."
"\"I'm lost,\" he mumbled. \"I'm just lost.\""
"He is a relic of his violent past, but Mr. Cooper, and the special prison that holds him, may represent the future of corrections in a time when judges and other politicians are offering longer, \"true-time\" sentences, like life without parole, as a way to protect the public from crime."
"This small 200-bed prison in the pine-shrouded hills of northwestern Alabama near the Mississippi line is one of only a few in the nation specializing in aged and disabled inmates, but that is expected to change as prison populations turn gradually gray."
"While the proportion of older prisoners has risen only slightly in recent years, their numbers have jumped substantially. In 1989, the nation's prisons held 30,500 inmates 50 or older; by 1993, that number had risen to almost 50,500, according to the American Civil Liberties Union's National Prison Project."
"But experts say the major increases are still to come. \"Three-strikes\" sentencing for habitual offenders and new laws that require inmates to serve all or most of their sentences, instead of just a fraction, will mean \"an aging phenomenon\" in American prisons, said James Austin, the executive vice president of the National Council on Crime and Delinquency in San Francisco."
"\"There are going to be huge geriatric wards,\" said Jenni Gainsborough, a lawyer with the National Prison Project."
"The older inmates will fill beds needed for younger criminals who are more of a threat, said Burl Cain, warden at the Angola State Penitentiary in Louisiana, the nation's largest maximum-security prison. \"We need our prison beds for the predators who are murdering people today,\" he said."
"Locked away for good, inmates will need special medical care and will have to be housed inside separate cellblocks, or separate prisons like Hamilton, to protect them from younger, stronger predators, said W. C. Berry, the warden at Hamilton."
"\"What else can we do with them?\" he said."
"One Hamilton inmate, Thomas Gurley, has Huntington's disease. He sits in a chair all day and shakes and stares. He was a kidnapper, but now he has trouble holding a spoon."
"It may seem cruel to lock a man away and watch him slowly die, Mr. Berry said, but most of the men in his care could not survive in the general population. Some are missing legs, some have misplaced their minds, some are just too old. They have heart, kidney or liver failure and need machines to keep them alive."
"Some victims' rights groups see the slow death of these men as poetic justice and say they should take their chances in the general population, to see what it is like to live in fear."
"But Mr. Berry, who built a reputation as a no-nonsense police detective before coming here, has seen what men do to each other in prison. Inmates who are getting old write him letters and beg to transfer to his prison, which has been in operation since Federal lawsuits in the 1970's obliged the state to separate its weaker inmates."
"\"They sort of look out for each other here,\" he said. The inmates who can work strip beds and help clean up after the old, most helpless ones. When Mr. Gurley slips from his chair to the floor, other inmates lift him back in."
"There are prison breaks, but the escapees do not usually get far. Two inmates, one blind, one mostly blind and unable to breathe on his own, made it as far as the town hospital. It is across the street."
"\"We had another one get out, and we found him at the end of the runway of the local airport,\" Warden Berry said. \"He couldn't breathe that well. I told him that if he hadn't had to stop every fourth landing light to take a breath, he might have made it.\""
"Mr. Cooper travels only in his mind. \"I don't know if they'll ever set me free,\" he said, looking up from his bed, a pair of black-framed glasses sitting crooked on his face. \"I don't know. I don't reckon so.\""
"Some days, if he forgets enough, he already is."
"All Jessie Hatcher's life, the devil in him would come swimming out every time a drink of whisky trickled in."
"\"It was 1979, down in Pike County,\" he said, looking down some dusty road in his memory for the life he took. \"Me and this boy was drinking. He thought I had some money, but I didn't have none. We took to fighting, and I killed him. Quinn. His name was Quinn. Killed him with a .32. I was bad to drink back then. I never drunk another drop.\""
"Like Grant Cooper, he has a life history of violence. He shot a woman several times with a .22 rifle in 1978, but she lived and he served less than a year. He was drunk then. The murder of the man in Pike County sent him away for life."
"He is 76 now and limps on a cane because of a broken leg that never healed right. He works all day in the flower garden, where he has raked the dirt so smooth you can roll marbles on it."
"\"My favorites are the saucer sunflowers,\" he said, \"because they're so beautiful.\""
"The young man, the one whose life was washed away on a river of whisky, seems to have vanished inside this wizened little man on his knees in the mud, plucking weeds and humming spirituals."
"\"They could take the fences down and I wouldn't run,\" he said. \"This is the right place for me."
"\"Lock me down in one of them other prisons, and I'd drop like a top,\" he said, referring to the practice in general prisons of locking aged or infirm inmates in cells to protect them."
"The State of Alabama, often criticized for taking prison reform in the wrong direction with its return to leg irons and breaking rocks, is part of a more progressive trend with Hamilton, said Ms. Gainsborough of the civil liberties union."
"But while the prison is hailed as a humane answer, the practice of keeping old inmates until death is wasting crucial space, said Mr. Cain, the Angola warden."
"\"There comes a time when a man goes through what we call criminal menopause and he is unable to do the crime that he is here for,\" Mr. Cain said. \"My prison is becoming an old folks' home.\""
"He sees nothing wrong with letting an old killer die free after prison has taken most of his life from him. As politicians shout for life sentences, he watches helplessly as Angola, with 3,000 inmates doing life, fills beyond capacity."
"\"When the criminal is not able to commit that crime again, it's time to put someone in there who is killing now,\" said Mr. Cain, who keeps older inmates in a special ward. \"As Jesus Christ said, 'Let the dead bury the dead.' We don't have room.\""
"For some inmates at Hamilton, keeping them locked away for life is the only alternative. Jason Riley, 41, has been partially blind since a car hit him when he was 3. He killed two women by stabbing and strangling them, then cut his own arms to watch himself bleed. He has said he would kill again."
"\"I'll probably die here,\" said Mr. Riley, who carries a magnifying glass in his pocket to see with. One of his gray eyes looms huge behind it as he gazes at you. \"I accept that, accepted it several years ago. Life would be easier for some of the other inmates if they would accept it, too.\""
"Sentences, especially life sentences, used to be like rubber bands. They stretched or snapped short depending on the inmate's record in prison, crowding and, sometimes, whether the inmate could convince the parole board that he had found the Lord. Inmates like the 76-year-old Mr. Hatcher could usually walk after 20 years, even with a murder conviction. But that was before it became so popular for politicians to run on pro-death-penalty, throw-away-the-key platforms."
"\"I'd like to be free,\" Mr. Hatcher said, \"for a little while.\""
"He has a feeling he will be, he said, and winks, as if some higher power has whispered in his ear that this will happen."
"Warden Berry, standing beside him, looks away. It is common for a man doing life without parole to have that feeling, even though he knows chances are he will leave on a hospital gurney, or with a blanket over his head."
"\"They think, 'I just want a few years at the end of my life, free,' \" he said. \"You'll see them, men in their 70's, suddenly start walking around out in the prison yard, trying to take care of themselves, to save themselves for it."
"\"And some we have who wake up in the middle of the night in a cold sweat, because the thought of going out terrifies them.\""
"They know that they have lived so long inside, everything they knew or loved outside will be gone, he said. So when they walk out the door, they will be completely alone."
"The Birmingham jail was full of martyrs and heroes in the 1960's. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. made history locked behind its walls."
"William (Tex) Johnson, who snatched $24 from a man's hand and got caught, was in fancy company. But as the civil rights heroes rejoined their struggle, a white judge gave him 50 years."
"He escaped three times. \"You can't give no 21-year-old boy 50 years; I had to run,\" he said. While he was out, he committed 38 more crimes. Now he is at Hamilton, finishing his sentence. He will be released in 1998, but two strokes have left him mostly dead on one side. \"I believe I can make it,\" he said. \"I believe I can.\""
"There will be nothing on the outside for him. Warden Berry said that when an inmate reached a certain point, it might be more humane to keep him in prison. Wives die, children stop coming to see him."
"\"We bury most of them ourselves,\" on state land, he said. The undertaking and embalming class at nearby Jefferson State University prepares the bodies for burial for free, for the experience."
"\"They make 'em up real nice,\" the warden said."
