"x"
"The two fieldworkers scraped hoes over weeds that werent there."
"Let us pretend we see many weeds, Francisco Galvez told his friend Rafael. That way, maybe theyd get a full weeks work."
"They always tried to get jobs together. Rafael, the older man, had a truck. Galvez spoke English. And they liked each others jokes."
"But this was the first time in a month, together or alone, that theyd found work."
"They were two men in a field where there should have been two crews of 20. A farmer had gambled on planting drought-resistant garbanzo beans where there was no longer enough water for tomatoes or onions. Judging by the garbanzo plants blond edges, it was a losing bet."
"Galvez, 35, said his dream is to work every day until he is too bent and worn, then live a little longer and play with his grandchildren. He wants to buy his children shoes when they need them. His oldest son needed a pair now."
"Most of all, he wants to stay put."
"But the slowly unfurling disaster of Californias drought is catching up to him. Each day more families are leaving for Salinas, Arizona, Washington  anywhere they heard there were jobs."
"Even in years when rain falls and the Sierra mountains hold a snowpack that will water almonds and onions, cattle and cantaloupes, Hurons population swells and withers with the season."
"These days in Huron  and Mendota and Wasco and Firebagh and all the other farmworker communities on the west side of the San Joaquin Valley  even the permanent populations are packing up."
"The house across the street from us  they all left yesterday, Galvez said. Maybe this town wont be here anymore?"
"Since the days of the Dust Bowl, these have been the places where trouble hits first and money doesnt last."
"Before the drought moved into Year Three, Galvez paid the rent and bought hischildren school supplies. When he left for the fields, his wife, Maya, would send him off with a lunch of tortillas and beans and fruit."
"It was late afternoon on this April day. He hadnt eaten since the night before."
"He was more than a month behind on his $850-a-month rent, but his landlord had agreed to let him pay a little each week."
"The month before, when Maya told him she was pregnant, she apologized."
"She told me she is worried for me because there is no work, he said. But I toldher, A baby is a happy thing. Dont worry, well handle it. I will try. I will do my best."
"Galvezs house is ranch-style, three bedrooms. Theres a prancing Chihuahua named Mommy and a crate of oranges in the corner  a farmer gave Galvez permission to gather fruit on the ground."
"The walls are freshly painted and hung with school class photos and a calendar with scenes of Yosemite and scripture. But some windows are cracked and theres almost no furniture."
"The people who broke in on the same day Galvez learned his wife was pregnant took everything, even the beds. They left one wooden chair."
"The neighbors across the street brought over a big-screen TV and a soft chair. Galvez borrowed money from his brother in Texas to fix the largest window. His brother, he said, is the type of person who expects to be paid back promptly."
"The garbanzo field yielded two days of work. It was now two weeks later and Galvez hadnt found any other jobs. He said the fields are his only choice. In Oaxaca, he left school after fourth grade to work. Hes been in California since he was 17, but he is not a U.S. citizen."
"Rafael, a man who has worked undermany last names, knows a lot of contractors and used to be able to line up work ahead of time."
"But now, in the early mornings, long before sunrise, they go to the parking lot in front of the panaderia where they can no longer afford to buy Mexican sweetbread and coffee. They wait with other day laborers for a contractor to drive up and bark an offer."
"The week before the going rate was $8 an hour, minus $8 to $12 a day for a ride in the van to fields 45 minutes away. So many people have fled town that farmers were hurting for workers and the offer on this day had gone up to $8.50 an hour. Still, Galvez hadnt been hired. He went home when he wanted to be working."
"His two youngest girls, a tangle of giggles, played leapfrog in the empty living room. Manuel, 16, the oldest of six children, was in his room studying."
"Galvez is proud of Manuel for avoiding the streets."
"He comes straight home from school. He works out, watches TV and stays inside. He wants to join the Navy someday, Galvez said. I tell the other ones, Be like your brother."
"Shyly, lowering his head, Galvez recalled that recently Manuel gave him a playfulpunch in the arm and they tussled the way they did when his son was small."
"He told me he was proud of me. He told me he wanted to be like me, Galvez said. I said, I dont want you to be like me. You have to be better than me."
"By late April, the air held the warmth of growing season."
"Water flowed in concrete canals. Precisely set sprinklers sent their spray ch-ch-ch-ing over fields. A high school runner in red shorts stood out against miles of blue-green onion fields."
"The illusion of lushness was there. But without the rains, even Californias vast system of buying, selling, pumping and moving trillions of gallons of water from the Sacramento Delta to this dry, clay-bottom plain  even pumping so much groundwater that parts of the Central Valley sink a foot a year  wasnt enough to keep Huron working."
"The main drag was as sleepy as the stray dogs napping in every shady doorway. Two men in cowboy hats gossiped on a bench. A daily afternoon poker game was languidly being played in a window booth at a near-empty cafe."
"Only for fun, no money, the waitress said, though there were clearly stacks of bills on the table."
"Huron already whispered of the ghost town it could soon be: It has a $2-million deficit."
"Only about 1,000 people in a town with a permanent population of 7,000 are registered to vote, and of those, only some 200 actually do."
"No one has declared for the two open City Council seats  including the incumbents. Each week at school, Galvezs children have fewer classmates."
"Antonio Chavarrias, a fieldworker, said the drought is different from other natural disasters because it doesnt end. This is the third year of drought but, he said, just the beginning of the hardships."
"Its going to get worse, he said. Theyre not planting. Think what it will be like at harvest."
"Chavarrias came from El Salvador, where, he said, people make $6 for five hours of work. He supports a 22-year-old daughter and a 20-year-old son going to college there."
"Theyre in my heart, he said. He hasnt seen them in 10 years."
"Galvez is determined that the one sacrifice he wont make for his family is leaving them."
"Once before when times were hard, he went alone to Texas to work. He was gone more than three years."
"There was another man. He almost lost his wife."
"I lose time with the children. I lose everything, he said. I dont want to do it again."
"But if they stay, he doesnt have work. The family now owed almost two months back rent."
"Its breaking my head, wondering what are we going to do, what are we going to do? he said."
"Mormons were at Galvezs house  two blond, Spanish-speaking women from Utah who had been coming weekly."
"Down the street, a man in a crisp plaid shirt was walking around in the heat, shaking hands and introducing himself to everyone he passed. He was an evangelical pastor from Lemoore."
"The drought is bringing a lot of religion to Huron. Ministers walk the streets; bars notorious for violence and prostitution are empty."
"Weve been having less problems downtown, said Police Chief George Turegano, a retired Capitola officer. People have less money in their pocket. Theyre saving it to move to the next town, the next job."
"When Turegano took the job two years ago  the 10th police chief in about as many years  he told his friends in law enforcement that Huron was like the Wild West."
"Not too many bedroom communities have the level of nightly shootings, prostitution and domestic abuse as these small Westside towns, he said. But its calmer lately."
"At Galvezs house the lead missionary was encouraging Galvezs middle daughter, 12-year-old Dianey, in prayer."
"Just say whats in your heart, she told her."
"Dianey haltingly gave thanks for waking up in the morning, and that her grandmother hadnt been sick lately. She didnt pray for rain as numerous signs across the Central Valley suggest."
"Galvez, who was raised Catholic, has been going to several different churches."
"I like what they say. They all say the same thing: If your mind is right you can talk to God and he will tell you what to do, he said. I still have to learn how to make my mind right."
"In May, a season when Hurons population once doubled with workers planting and picking, Galvez had found three days of work in two weeks."
"The family was down to the amount of his last check: $256. They had stocked up on huge bags of beans and rice. The Mormon missionaries had brought misshapen cupcakes, the cake not reaching to the top of the cups and canned chocolate frosting three times higher. Two family friends had brought over bags of sweet breads and cilantro from their garden."
"Galvez and Maya called a family meeting. Galvez said they told the children they would probably be moving to Texas soon."
"The 15-year-old, Itzel, said no, she had a boyfriend. The 11-year-old, Francisco, said no, he liked his school. The oldest son, Manuel, said not a word. He only put a hand on his fathers shoulder."
"Beneath this small farm town at the end of whats left of the Kings River, the ground is sinking."
"Going into the fourth year of drought, farmers have pumped so much water that the water table below Stratford fell 100 feet in two years. Land in some spots in the Central Valley has dropped a foot a year."
"In July, the town well cracked in three places. Household pipes spit black mud, then pale yellow water. After that, taps were dry for two weeks while the water district patched the steel well casing."
"In September, the children of migrant farmworkers who usually come back to Stratford School a few weeks late, after the grape harvest, never came back at all."
"By October, there were new faces in the drought relief line in front of the school, picking up boxes of applesauce, canned tomatoes, peanut butter, rice."
"If rain doesnt come soon to California, cities and suburbs will survive, with maybe fewer flower beds or more expensive lettuce."
"But in Stratford  where the school has had some of the same teachers for 40 years,the auto parts store doubles as a coffeehouse and first names change but last names dont  survival isnt a given."
"Even above ground, the town is sinking."
"Arches at both ends of the town square spell out S-T-R-A-T-FO-R-D in the shape of a rainbow. Years ago there was a population sign, but people argue over the last number it gave. There are about 900 people left now."
"The glory days, when the arches were entrances to burger joints and gas stations for Central Valley residents driving to Pismo Beach, faded decades ago."
"But nothing like this, said Josh Orton, manager of the farm equipment store his great-great-grandfather started in 1906. Theres just no water."
"Two doors down at Hardins Grocery, the inventory has evaporated to a puddle of chips, drinks, tobacco and pregnancy tests near the cash register."
"Customers push open the door to the dim store and its empty shelves, hollering Hey ya, Kenny, or  Hola, Kenny over the door chimes."
"Oye, Carnal  hey, dude  the Yemeni store owner with tired eyes answers in Spanish slang."
"His name is Mahmod Alrihimi, but theyve been calling him Kenny for 24 years, ever since he leased the business from Mr. Hardin, who still lives in a trailer behind the grocery. (I dont know why Kenny. Maybe it is easier for them to say?)"
"Each day Alrihimi opens the store at 8 a.m. and closes at 10 p.m. If hes really tired hell go home a half-hour early, but peopleinvariably knock on his door and say, Kenny, can you come out? We just need a bottle of milk."
"He doesnt mind. He likes feeling needed. I really love this town. I know so many families, he said."
"A man put two packages of hot dog buns and a roll of paper towels on the counter."
"Hey, Kenny, OK if I pay for these after Friday? he asked, lowering his voice."
"Alrihimi nodded. But his stomach dropped. This was a man who had never asked for credit before."
"The store owner had 29 receipts that constituted the weeks IOUs. On the backs of two torn-up cigarette cartons, he wrote the running accounts: the ones where they owed $34, paid $12, then charged $8."
"Its too sad to say no. I think of their kids, said Alrihimi, a father of five."
"They dont have any money. I dont have any money. Were all trying to get through, little-by-little-bit."
"When he has to run errands, Darlene Lacey watches the store. Shes been helping out since her husband died 13 years ago."
"Alrihimi worries about her."
"I think that when people cant pay, she takes money out of her own pocket and puts it in the cash register, he said. She is a very good-heart lady. But she has too little money."
"Later that afternoon, when Alrihimi was at the bank, Lacey rang up two sodas for an elderly couple who asked for credit. Then she slipped $2 in the cash register."
"Kenny is hanging on by a thread, she said. And, oh my gosh, our little town needs him."
"Next door at the post office, a wall of boxes have closed stickers over them. They belong to families whove moved or havent paid their bills."
"The lone employee, Rick Kimball, is bending the rules and keeping mail for those still in town. (Theyre working their tails off to get by. Seems like the least I can do.)"
"He likes learning about people by paying attention to their mail."
"The Hamiltons? Nice folks. All the womens first names start with S and all the men are named Tony, he said."
"Johnny Caldeira, 36, picked up a package, then leaned his elbows on the counter to chat."
"Im beginning to feel like a bartender, Kimball, a former parole officer and truck driver, told him."
"Youre the hangout spot now, Caldeira said. There arent any other places left."
"Caldeira went to Stratford School. Most of the classmates he graduated with in eighth grade are still in town."
"Adrian teaches fourth grade, Dannys inthe reserves. The Meyers  George and Charlie  farm, Caldeira said. They just lost their grandfather, old man Meyers. I think he was 100. We just lost Mr. Henry."
"His former seventh-grade teacher, William Henry, persuaded Caldeira to go to college after he returned from the war in Iraq. This month the graduate takes the test for his credentials. He wants to teach in Stratford like the man who pushed him."
"Mr. Henry used to be in the Navy before he was a teacher, so when I came back, I could actually talk to him. He had seen things too."
"At first it was, How you doing? When you going back to school? Then one day he comes in, slams down a college application and says, Now get your ass in school before I kick it. Thats a cleaned-up version. Mr. Henry had a mouth."
"Each spring, the seventh- and eighth-graders still dance around a maypole, and theres always a festa at the Portuguese Hall."
"But its the Constitution Day Parade that is really something to behold, said David Orton, Joshs father."
"A couple of farmers pull kindergartners on flatbed trucks. The Ortons add a tractor and Stratford School Principal Bill Bilbo rides his motorcycle  a crowd favorite."
"There are so many people in the parade that it leaves about 20 people watching, Orton said, shaking with laughter. And the next year, we do it again. This town has a way of holding on."
"The Orton family first came to farm in Stratford in the 1800s, when they got pushed off their Lemoore land by railroad barons."
"Back then, their farm was on the edge of Tulare Lake  the lake that once was. It had been the largest body of fresh water west of the Mississippi, some four and a half times bigger than Lake Tahoe. But the four Sierra rivers that flowed to the lake  the Kings, Kern, Kaweah and Tule  were dammed, diverting water that powerful landowners could own and sell. The tule fog that rises from the ground and blankets the Central Valley in a blinding thickness each winter is said to be a Yokut Indiancurse that the stolen waters shall haunt this place forever."
"The drought is affecting even eternal curses. There seems to be less fog each year. Farmers fear it could hurt the moisture-loving, high-value nut crops that are quickly replacing fields of alfalfa, tomatoes and cotton."
"At the Ortons, they still grow row crops, but they planted only 18 of their 100 acres. Now two wells are out and they dont have water for what they planted."
"Were growing dirt, David Orton said. Its a very popular crop around here right now."
"On a Wednesday morning when the sky was still dawn-pink, Allyson Lemons and JD, her husband of 62 years, walked to the auto parts store. She carried a plate of fresh-baked chocolate chip cookies."
"With all the towns cafes long gone, Chris Rodriques always puts on a pot of coffee athis familys store. On Wednesdays, Allyson and JD bring cookies. Last week it was her cornflake recipe."
"The couple took their place at a long table with floral-patterned dinette chairs, where a group of neighbors had already settled in."
"A couple of farmers read the Wall Street Journal. Dick Newton, 67, stretched out long legs while he checked college football scores in the local paper."
"Newton is one of the old families by dint of his mothers side, who settled in the area in 1905. His fathers family didnt come till 1911."
"They got to chatting about that time when Newton and his brother were water-skiing on the Kings River  there was water in it then  and from the far bank, Newtons brother shot an arrow at one of the Lemons chickens. The arrow went right through the birds neck and carried it to the front porch."
"You remember that? Newton asked."
"Oh, do I, said Allyson Lemons. I heard something. Came to the door. And it landed right at my feet. I cooked it up for dinner."
"The Newton brother who shot the chicken is now farming marijuana on Orcas Island in Washington state, where the crop is legal."
"Newton had a text from a farmer who said that 70% of his crop of pistachios were blanks  no nuts inside."
"No one knew the reason for sure, but when the snows dont come and rain doesnt fall and even the fog thins, things go wrong."
"On the other side of the square, Alrihimi opened for the day. Three years ago hed had a deli in back, with lines of field workers out the door twice a day. Now, he owed so, so much money."
"The other week, a farmer had put a hand on his shoulder and said, Kenny, when the rain comes, the money comes."
"I pray every day the water is coming back, he said. I dont want to leave here."
"He sat on a milk crate in the doorway of the store. Lacey pulled out a crate and joined him in the sunshine of another cloudless day."
"When a man of 91 is downright cantankerous and has been on his land longer than most everyone else has been alive, he wastes no time speaking his mind."
"So after his new neighbor started sinking a well to plant a water-sucking almond orchard in the middle of the worst drought hed ever seen, James Turner hurried over."
"How deep you going to dig your well?"
"Five hundred feet, Davinder Singh told him."
"My well is 300 feet. Why, youre going to take my water!"
"Singh, a man of gentle humor, gave no answer on that warm day last winter. Yet he took an instant liking to the fierce old man."
"Turner reminded him of his 85-year-old father back in India  hed been a police officer who stubbornly refused every bribe, guaranteeing his family grew up in poverty in a region known for corrupt authorities."
"Now Singh was chasing prosperity in Californias almond rush."
"Up and down these rural Madera roads with fractional names  Avenue 19, Avenue 19, Avenue 20  nut trees were going in, wells were going dry and farmers were putting debt-heavy bets on a crop that requires twice as much water as thirsty cotton."
"Theyre doing it not just in spite of the drought, but because of it: Almonds may be Californias last crop valuable enough to make a profit if the drought doesnt end."
"Turner thought the folks buying up swaths of land for orchards  some of them investment fund managers who had never farmed a day in their lives  were missing the bigger picture."
"You pump all the water out, the land collapses, see? All those pockets where the water is supposed to go, they wont be there when it does rain, he said."
"Ive seen so much stupid in my years that I cant remember all of it. But pumping the earth dry? Were killing ourselves, plain and simple."
"All through the summer, Turners daughter Lorna  he still called her Lil Bit, like he had since the day she was born  couldnt sleep."
"Id hear that pump roaring over at Daves all night every night, she said."
"Driving to her job as an accountant at a womens prison in Chowchilla or over to Fairmead to visit her Aunt Zel, shed gape at a land so quickly transformed."
"Growing up, there was nothing but grapevines, cotton fields, a few animals grazing and then, overnight, nothing but nut trees, she said."
"Zelma Baker, 91, had come to California during the great Dust Bowl migration of the 1930s."
"I dont know nothing about anything called the Dust Bowl, said Baker, Lornas maternal aunt. But I do know we left Okemah, Okla., on April 7, 1936, and we arrived in California on Oct. 20."
"Turners family, sharecroppers, had come from Oklahoma 10 years earlier. He was only 3, but he still has an accent thick as butter on corn bread, like many of those raised in the Central Valley."
"He bought the farm the year he married and paid off the land in seven years  he didnt believe in owing money. Growing cotton and alfalfa on the 20 acres didnt feed five children, so he worked construction and grew grapes and fruit trees."
"In late April, Turners well went dry. Across the street, his neighbor, a beekeeper, also ran out of water."
"He told me, James, were looking at a reverse Dust Bowl."
"Turner had water trucked in. Lorna washed the dishes as quickly as possible and made her 15-year-old son, Travon, keep his showers to four minutes."
"Turners daughter and grandson had moved in after his wife, Ernestine, died in 2008."
"Wed been married 60 years when she died, he said. We never split. Not once. She was a good woman. She helped me a lot."
"On the day he spoke of Ernestine, he was hauling wood in a cart hooked to his 1955 tractor and listening to a news station on a transistor radio of apparently similar vintage. The topic turned to unrest over an unarmed black teenager killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo. Turner  a black man  turned off the radio."
"Rage was one of the things Ernestine had helped him with. He was a soldier about to ship off to the Pacific Theater during World War II whenthe train stopped in Texas and he got off to get a hamburger."
"I was clean, pressed  I believed in having my clothes nice, he said. I had a bruise on my shoulder from sharpshooter practice. I could feel the spot. A man in a dirty shirt looked at me and said, You want anything to eat, then you go over there and get it, and he pointed to a corner that said Negroes. There I was in Uncle Sams uniform maybe going to die for him and this man wouldnt sell me a hamburger."
"Turner said if hed had his rifle, he would have shot the man dead. He kept thinking about that until he told Ernestine."
"She wasnt one to let people walk over her, but she could make a man look forward instead of back, he said. I miss her."
"Abruptly, he changed his attention to a fluffy dog darting around."
"I dont like dogs, never have, he said."
"Lil Bit and T., they sneak this one in the house at night. They think I dont know. Im old, see? So they think Im stupid. But I know."
"Turner couldnt remember a hotter year. It ended up being the hottest on record in California."
"The grapevines growing at the edge of his property had leaves that were dark and curled, but the stress somehow made the Thompson grapes taste better. He told Singh to help himself to the fruit, and he did."
"Singhs wife, Balwinder, offered Turner cups of fragrant, sweet chai, which he always refused. He thought it was strange they drank hot tea in the summer."
"He paid almost $400 to have water trucked in every few weeks. He had the delivery man fill a 2,500-gallon tank and sprinkle a bit on the garden."
"Turner loved his rosebushes best."
"In 1979, when he was recovering from a heart attack, Ernestine brought him a single-stemmed red rose from the grocery store."
"Im laying in the hospital bed and I looked at that rose and I said, Boy, that rose is pretty. That made me love my wife even more. I said to myself, If I get out of this hospital Im going to plant me a garden of roses."
"In July, his rosebushes were dry and had few blooms, but they were alive."
"In the almond groves, harvest was starting when the nuts should have been just cracking open. The clouds of pink and white blooms had arrived at the beginning of February, earlier than anyone could recall. Farmers ran pumps throughout the ominously warm spring as well as the summer."
"You could say almonds, heralded as an anti-aging super nut (technically a seed), are a doomsday food: If aquifers in the worlds farming regions continue to go down and food supplies falter, theyre a source of protein that requires fewer resources than meat or dairy."
"Prices were already around $4 a pound  or about $120,000 an acre even with low yield."
"Everything is going up, up, up  except the water table, Singh said. At the end of July, when the heat hung still and heavy, Turner decided to stop watering."
"There was no guarantee the fall rains would come. His well driller had a waiting list so long that he didnt expect to get to the wells that had run out in April until December."
"Turner went to a family reunion in New Orleans, and when he was gone, Singh looked across and saw the shriveling vines, the brown shrubs."
"Whats going on over there? he asked his workers. They said the family was gone for a few weeks and their well was dry."
"Singh halted work on the orchard and hooked up a hose to his domestic well. He dragged it over and watered Turners plants."
"When Turner returned, Singh told him he should have let him know he was out of water. They were neighbors. He would fill his tank for him every few weeks."
"The gesture hasnt saved Singh from Turners occasional scoldings."
"In October, Singh invited Turner on a trip to Home Depot. Turner found out it was in part to use his military discount on $3,000 worth of farm equipment."
"Why, you had me out after dark. I dont stay out after dark. I have a cold now, Turner told him sternly through a closed screen door the next time his neighbor visited. Singh looked down at his feet, hiding a smile during the chiding."
"They dont know a lot about each other."
"Singh doesnt know that Turners children talked him into a reverse mortgage so he and Ernestine could travel in their senior years. Instead, the money went to Ernestines hospital bills and, now, a well."
"Turner doesnt know that Singh drove a truck for someone else, then bought his own truck, then a fleet, saving for years to fulfill a dream of raising his family on a large farm, the way his wife had grown up in India."
"But as to why Singh gives water to Turner, and how Turner feels about the neighbor delivering water, they give the same answer: Hes a good man."
"It smelled like it was about to rain  a sweet, earthy musk rising from the ground, a fresh breeze beginning to stir."
"Singh and his workers and family sat outside drinking chai and looking at the orchard on a December day. In less than a year, the trees had gone from slender, foottall sticks to taller than a person."
"Turner watched from his dining room window."
"Them trees sure look pretty. Green, topped off nice and straight, he said. And hot tea makes sense today."
"One or two storms wouldnt make a dent in the drought. By most measures, there would have to be a good soaking every three days for the next six months to fill Californias reservoirs. Snow would have to pile up on the Sierra mountains, shining white well into spring, before a vast system of aqueducts and canals would deliver promised water."
"California had recently passed the first legislation to manage its groundwater, but Turner said he wasnt putting much store by that. It didnt kick in until 2040."
"He hadnt felt right about using the water Singh gave him for anything but household necessities. One orange tree in the garden had survived, but was struggling. He missed the way it usually looked this time of year. Covered with bright orange balls, shining like Christmas lights."
"He was pretty sure his favorite rosebush  the one out by the mailbox, that grew big red roses just like the one Ernestine gave him  was dead."
"But hed noticed a speck of green down at the bottom. January was the best month to cut back roses. Hed read that once in a newspaper gardening column. Come the new year he was going to cut it all the way down. Maybe it could still come back."
"The grandmother sat outside in her Sunday best next to a house with peeling paint, her canned iced tea resting on top of a washing machine that didnt work. Shed been without running water for four months."
"Up an easy-to-miss dirt road, a 70-year-old woman moved 5-gallon jugs of water into her single-wide trailer. It was hard because she was weak from chemotherapy. Her water had stopped coming out of the tap three months ago."
"At the elementary school, a kitchen worker talked about all the children who were coming to school dirty."
"This scattered Tulare County community may be the hardest-hit place in Californias punishing drought. Of its 7,300 people, almost 1,000 have no running water."
"But few knew that until Donna Johnson, 72, started counting."
"During a week when the temperature reached 106, Johnson drove her purple PT Cruiser past Beware of dog signs and up side roads that looked long-deserted. She found mobile homes hidden behind other buildings. She said to her newfound neighbors, Hi. Do you have water?"
"Again and again, the answer was no."
"When Johnsons well ran dry in June, she and her husband, Howard, had no idea they were part of something bigger."
"Id heard California drought! on the news, she said. But I guess I was just oblivious to how bad it had gotten."
"At the local gas station where everyone stops for a cold soda, Johnson tuned in to the conversations."
"It was all, So-and-sos well ran dry,  she said."
"No public agency was keeping track. Until this week, California was the only Western state that didnt regulate groundwater, including an estimated 600,000 private, domestic wells mostly in more rural regions such as the Central Valley. Groundwater levels here have plunged by 60 feet or more in some spots, and tens of thousands of wells are in danger."
"In July, Johnson decided to put together a list of people out of water in East Porterville. She figured that while she was at it, she should bring them water."
"The Porterville Recorder ran an article that gave her phone number and address and said she was collecting bottled water for drought victims. The next day there were pallets of plastic bottles under her tarp carport."
"Johnson deputized Matt Rogers, a 19-year-old former neighbor, as her righthand man to make the deliveries. The calls from people needing water came as quickly as the donated bottles."
"Families would call at midnight and say, Were completely out of water, and wed go take them some, Rogers said. Id tell them it was a lot of work for a 72-year-old woman, but Donna got mad and told me to stop telling people her age."
"Still, the growing numbers and nonstop deliveries were taking a toll."
"Id come home at night and cry, Johnson said. I thought What are these people supposed to do? They could be dying for lack of water and just get brushed under the carpet."
"For months, scores of people had called the county, the next-door city of Porterville and the local water district to report dry wells. The answer was always the same: This agency isnt responsible for wells on private property."
"But officials hadnt realized how many people were desperate."
"Last month, volunteers, firefighters and county workers delivered a three-week emergency supply of drinking water to 300 homes."
"In front of an East Porterville fire station, a storage tank was filled with water from a city hydrant that residents could use for bathing and flushing toilets. Signs warned in English and Spanish: Do not use this water for drinking."
"Nonprofit agencies began coordinatingdonations, grants and deliveries. Johnson was no longer a solo force. But she didnt stop her daily water runs."
"Theyre working their bejesus off at County Emergency Services, Johnson said. But youve got to understand a place like East Porterville. Not everyone is going to fill out paperwork, and some people are hard to find."
"On a day when the heat was pressing down like a waffle iron, Johnson and Rogers loaded up shrink-wrapped cases of bottled water."
"Johnson pulled her lace-trimmed cowboy hat low. Her sunglasses had zebra stripes and rhinestones. She had elephants on her shirt and an elephant hanging from her rear-view mirror."
"Elephants this week. Next week it might be angels or horses, she said."
"She used to be fickle about men too, until she married Howard, a physical therapist who prefers to stay in the background. They share a love of horses and 20 years ago bought a place with a corral in East Porterville, outside city limits."
"Did you guys even know that they say if you live on the east side, youre nothing? Rogers asked her."
"Nobodys nothing, Johnson answered."
"On a lawn as pale and scratchy as a hay bale, 9-year-old Destiny Carrillo attempted a cartwheel while her grandfather, Raul Carrillo, a house painter, watched."
"Hi, do you have water? Johnson asked, pulling into their driveway."
"A little, he said. But if two people take a shower, its done."
"Eight people lived in the tidy home. Destinys mother, Veronica Carrillo, stepped out on a porch decorated with a small pot of geraniums."
"Thank you for the water. We didnt know where to go. Were grateful, she said, smoothing her daughters hair."
"On the next block, Manuel Dominguez, 84, didnt answer his door right away."
"Is he OK? Hes old. Hes always at home, Johnson said, adding another Yoohoo!"
"Dominguez came around the corner from the backyard, where he had been working on the pump of his well."
"He still doesnt want to believe that the ground is out of water, said his girlfriend, Gloria Acosta, 65, coming up the driveway with a stack of bottled water."
"She used to bring 3 gallons of drinking water a day from her home in Porterville, but her landlord found out and put a stop to it. He was afraid it would run up his water bill. Now she has bought three cases of 24 bottles of water on sale for $7.98."
"Plus $2.38 CRV, she said. You keep track of stuff like that when you live on Social Security and baby-sitting money. Johnson added another 24-pack of water."
"Dominguezs daughter Angie Nunagray came through the door with a 5-gallon jug of water for washing dishes. She cleans her fathers house every day, being sure not to disturb his stacks of books, the loaded rifles propped in the corner or his collection of scissors covering one wall  because a man can never have too many scissors."
"I vacuum and dust, but you cant get it really clean without water, she said."
"Dominguez pulled out a splintered guitar and sang Mexican waltzes. Acosta rolled her eyes."
"She thinks Im loco, but she loves me, he said."
"Down a dirt road, a schoolgirl carrying a flute case unchained a dog and they went for a walk, kicking up dust. A man washed his hands in a bucket of water. Places lucky enough to have a small pool of underground water had green lawns."
"Marcella Ramirez, 70, had heard Johnsons car coming and was waiting with an ancient dolly outside her trailer. Wire flowers sprouted from the top of a chain-link fence. An American flag windsock drifted from a sagging carport. A miniature wishing well  it was dry  sat on bare dirt."
"Matt can carry it in, Johnson told her."
"Ramirez agreed, but emphasized that she was strong enough to wheel the water in herself if she had to. She said she was a lucky woman. The last year was tough  her brother died, she fought cancer and the well ran dry in June. But she feels healthy now, her hair grew back, and look at her nice SUV."
"I didnt go to school or nothing and I got a car and a drivers license, she said. I made a good deal and I cant even read or write."
"Johnsons eyebrows lifted."
"Marcella, do you have those forms from the county for water deliveries? Do you need help filling them out?"
"On the hood of Ramirezs car they puzzled over which boxes to check."
"Are you multiethnicity? Johnson asked."
"Multi what? Ramirez said. I dont know what that means."
"Back on the road, Johnson talked about the last time shed seen rain."
"It was months ago. I was where I used to have lavender and so many flowers. I watched it dry up before it hit the ground."
"On the main road through town, a mother gave her 6-year-old daughter a bath  in her clothes, in a blue plastic drum of nonpotable water. The girl giggled and ducked her head underwater to get out the shampoo."
"Nearby, a tree swing swayed in a stir of hot air. Stairs led to the place where a trailer had once been, until a well ran dry and another family moved away to search for water."
