"x"
"A fourth-grade classroom on a forbidding stretch of the South Side was in the middle of multiplication tables when a voice over the intercom ordered Nicholas Whitiker to the principal's office. Cory and Darnesha and Roy and Delron and the rest of the class fell silent and stared at Nicholas, sitting sober-faced in the back."
"\"What did I do?\" Nicholas thought as he gathered himself to leave."
"He raced up the hall and down the steps to find his little sister, Ishtar, stranded in the office, nearly swallowed by her purple coat and hat, and principal's aides wanting to know why no one had picked her up from kindergarten. 'I Don't Know'"
"It was yet another time that the adult world called on Nicholas, a gentle, brooding 10-year-old, to be a man, to answer for the complicated universe he calls family."
"How could he begin to explain his reality -- that his mother, a welfare recipient rearing five young children, was in college trying to become a nurse and so was not home during the day, that Ishtar's father was separated from his mother and in a drug-and-alcohol haze most of the time, that the grandmother he used to live with was at work, and that, besides, he could not possibly account for the man who was supposed to take his sister home -- his mother's companion, the father of her youngest child?"
"\"My stepfather was supposed to pick her up,\" he said for simplicity's sake. \"I don't know why he's not here.\""
"Nicholas gave the school administrators the name and telephone numbers of his grandmother and an aunt, looked back at Ishtar with a big brother's reassuring half-smile and rushed back to class still worried about whether his sister would make it home O.K."
"Of all the men in his family's life, Nicholas is perhaps the most dutiful. When the television picture goes out again, when the 3-year-old scratches the 4-year-old, when their mother, Angela, needs ground beef from the store or the bathroom cleaned or can't find her switch to whip him or the other children, it is Nicholas's name that rings out to fix whatever is wrong."
"He is nanny, referee, housekeeper, handyman. Some nights he is up past midnight, mopping the floors, putting the children to bed and washing their school clothes in the bathtub. It is a nightly chore: the children have few clothes and wear the same thing every day. Curbside Service"
"He pays a price. He stays up late and goes to school tired. He brings home mostly mediocre grades. But if the report card is bad, he gets a beating. He is all boy -- squirming in line, sliding down banisters, shirt-tail out, shoes untied, dreaming of becoming a fireman so he can save people -- but his walk is the stiff slog of a worried father behind on the rent."
"He lives with his four younger half-siblings, his mother and her companion, John Mason, on the second floor of a weathered three-family walkup in the perilous and virtually all black Englewood section of Chicago."
"It is a forlorn landscape of burned-out tenements and long-shuttered storefronts where drunk men hang out on the corner, where gang members command more respect than police officers and where every child can tell you where the crack houses are."
"The neighborhood is a thriving drug mart. Dealers provide curbside service and residents figure that any white visitor must be a patron or a distributor. Gunshots are as common as rainfall. Eighty people were murdered in the neighborhood last year, more than in Omaha and Pittsburgh combined."
"Living with fear is second nature to the children. Asked why he liked McDonald's, Nicholas's brother Willie described the restaurant playground with violence as his yardstick. \"There's a giant hamburger, and you can go inside of it,\" Willie said. \"And it's made out of steel, so no bullets can't get through.\" The Family Many Eyes, Many Hands"
"It is in the middle of all this that Angela Whitiker is rearing her children and knitting together a new life from a world of fast men and cruel drugs. She is a strong-willed, 26-year-old onetime waitress who has seen more than most 70-year-olds ever will. A 10th-grade dropout, she was pregnant at 15, bore Nicholas at 16, had her second son at 17, was married at 20, separated at 21 and was on crack at 22."
"In the depths of her addiction, she was a regular at nearby crack houses, doing drugs with gang members, businessmen and, she said, police detectives, sleeping on the floors some nights. In a case of mistaken identity, she once had a gun put to her head. Now she feels she was spared for a reason."
"She has worked most of her life, picking okra and butterbeans and cleaning white people's houses as a teen-ager in Louisiana, bringing home big tips from businessmen when she waited tables at a restaurant in downtown Chicago, selling Polish sausages from a food truck by the Dan Ryan Expressway and snow cones at street fairs."
"She is a survivor who has gone from desperation to redemption, from absent mother to nurturing one, and who now sees economic salvation in nursing. Nicholas sees brand-name gym shoes and maybe toys and a second pair of school pants once she gets a job. Studying for Midterms"
"She went through treatment and has stayed away from drugs for two years. Paperback manuals from Alcoholics and Narcotics Anonymous sit without apology on the family bookshelf. A black velvet headdress from church is on the windowsill and the Bible is turned to Nehemiah -- emblems of her new life as a regular at Faith Temple, a Coptic Christian church on a corner nearby."
"For the last year, she has been studying a lot, talking about novels and polynomials and shutting herself in her cramped bedroom to study for something called midterms."
"That often makes Nicholas the de facto parent for the rest of the children. There is Willie, the 8-year-old with the full-moon face and wide grin who likes it when adults mistake him for Nicholas. There is Ishtar, the dainty 5-year-old. There is Emmanuel, 4, who worships Nicholas and runs crying to him whenever he gets hurt. And there is Johnathan, 3, who is as bad as he is cute and whom everyone calls John-John."
"That is just the beginning of the family. There are four fathers in all: Nicholas's father, a disabled laborer who comes around at his own rhythm to check on Nicholas, give him clothes and whip him when he gets bad grades. There is Willie's father, a construction worker whom the children like because he lets them ride in his truck."
"There is the man their mother married and left, a waiter at a soul food place. He is the father of Ishtar and Emmanuel and is remembered mostly for his beatings and drug abuse."
"The man they live with now is Mr. Mason, a truck driver on the night shift, who met their mother at a crack house and bears on his neck the thick scars of a stabbing, a reminder of his former life on the streets. He gets Nicholas up at 3 A.M. to sweep the floor or take out the garbage and makes him hold on to a bench to be whipped when he disobeys."
"Unemployment and drugs and violence mean that men may come and go, their mother tells them. \"You have a father, true enough, but nothing is guaranteed,\" she says. \"I tell them no man is promised to be in our life forever.\""
"There is an extended family of aunts, an uncle, cousins and their maternal grandmother, Deloris Whitiker, the family lifeboat, whom the children moved in with when drugs took their mother away."
"To the children, life is not the neat, suburban script of sitcom mythology with father, mother, two kids and golden retriever. But somehow what has to get done gets done."
"When Nicholas brings home poor grades, sometimes three people will show up to talk to the teacher -- his mother, his father and his mother's companion. When Nicholas practices his times tables, it might be his mother, his grandmother or Mr. Mason asking him what 9 times 8 is."
"But there is a downside. The family does not believe in sparing the rod and when Nicholas disobeys, half a dozen people figure they are within their rights to whip or chastise him, and do. But he tries to focus on the positive. \"It's a good family,\" he says. \"They care for you. If my mama needs a ride to church, they pick her up. If she needs them to baby-sit, they baby-sit.\" The Rules Ready to Run, Quick to Pray"
"It is a gray winter's morning, zero degrees outside, and school starts for everybody in less than half an hour. The children line up, all scarves and coats and legs. The boys bow their heads so their mother, late for class herself, can brush their hair one last time. There is a mad scramble for a lost mitten."
"Then she sprays them. She shakes an aerosol can and sprays their coats, their heads, their tiny outstretched hands. She sprays them back and front to protect them as they go off to school, facing bullets and gang recruiters and a crazy, dangerous world. It is a special religious oil that smells like drugstore perfume, and the children shut their eyes tight as she sprays them long and furious so they will come back to her, alive and safe, at day's end."
"These are the rules for Angela Whitiker's children, recounted at the Formica-top dining-room table:"
"\"Don't stop off playing,\" Willie said."
"\"When you hear shooting, don't stand around -- run,\" Nicholas said."
"\"Why do I say run?\" their mother asked."
"\"Because a bullet don't have no eyes,\" the two boys shouted."
"\"She pray for us every day,\" Willie said. The Walk to School"
"Each morning Nicholas and his mother go in separate directions. His mother takes the two little ones to day care on the bus and then heads to class at Kennedy-King College nearby, while Nicholas takes Willie and Ishtar to Banneker Elementary School."
"The children pass worn apartment buildings and denuded lots with junked cars to get to Banneker. Near an alley, unemployed men warm themselves by a trash-barrel fire under a plastic tent. There is a crack house across the street from school."
"To Nicholas it is not enough to get Ishtar and Willie to school. He feels he must make sure they're in their seats. \"Willie's teacher tell me, 'You don't have to come by here,' \" Nicholas said. \"I say, 'I'm just checking.' \""
"Mornings are so hectic that the children sometimes go to school hungry or arrive too late for the free school breakfast that Nicholas says isn't worth rushing for anyway."
"One bitter cold morning when they made it to breakfast, Nicholas played the daddy as usual, opening a milk carton for Ishtar, pouring it over her cereal, handing her the spoon and saying sternly, \"Now eat your breakfast.\""
"He began picking over his own cardboard bowl of Corn Pops sitting in vaguely sour milk and remembered the time Willie found a cockroach in his cereal. It's been kind of hard to eat the school breakfast ever since. The Children When Brothers Are Friends"
"Nicholas and Willie on brotherhood:"
"\"He act like he stuck to me,\" Nicholas said of Willie. \"Every time I move somewhere, he want to go. I can't even breathe.\""
"\"Well, what are brothers for?\" Willie asked."
"\"To let them breathe and live a long life,\" Nicholas said. \"Everytime I get something, they want it. I give them what they want after they give me a sad face.\""
"\"He saves me all the time,\" Willie said. \"When I'm getting a whooping, he says he did it.\""
"\"Then I get in trouble,\" Nicholas said."
"\"Then I say I did it, too, and we both get a whooping,\" Willie said. \"I save you, too, don't I, Nicholas?\""
"\"Willie's my friend,\" Nicholas said."
"\"I'm more than your friend,\" Willie shot back, a little hurt."
"Once Willie almost got shot on the way home from school. He was trailing Nicholas as he usually does when some sixth-grade boys pulled out a gun and started shooting."
"\"They were right behind Willie,\" Nicholas said. \"I kept calling him to get across the street. Then he heard the shots and ran.\""
"Nicholas shook his head. \"I be pulling on his hood but he be so slow,\" he said."
"\"Old slowpoke,\" Ishtar said, chiming in. No Friends, One Toy"
"In this neighborhood, few parents let their children outside to play or visit a friend's house. It is too dangerous. \"You don't have any friends,\" Nicholas's mother tells him. \"You don't have no homey. I'm your homey.\""
"So Nicholas and his siblings usually head straight home. They live in a large, barren apartment with chipped tile floors and hand-me-down furniture, a space their mother tries to spruce up with her children's artwork."
"The children spend their free time with the only toy they have -- a Nintendo game that their mother saved up for and got them for Christmas. The television isn't working right, though, leaving a picture so dark the children have to turn out all the lights and sit inches from the set to see the cartoon Nintendo figure flicker over walls to save the princess."
"Dinner is what their mother has time to make between algebra and Faith Temple. Late for church one night, she pounded on the stove to make the burners fire up, set out five plastic blue plates and apportioned the canned spaghetti and pan-fried bologna."
"\"Come and get your dinner before the roaches beat you to it!\" she yelled with her own urban gallows humor. Rhinestones in Church"
"Faith Temple is a tiny storefront church in what used to be a laundry. It is made up mostly of two or three clans, including Nicholas's, and practices a homegrown version of Ethiopian-derived Christianity."
"At the front of the spartan room with white walls and metal folding chairs, sits a phalanx of regal, black-robed women with foot-high, rhinestone-studded headdresses. They are called empresses, supreme empresses and imperial empresses. They include Nicholas's mother, aunt and grandmother, and they sing and testify and help calm flushed parishioners, who sometimes stomp and wail with the holy spirit."
"The pastor is Prophet Titus. During the week he is Albert Lee, a Chicago bus driver, but on Sundays he dispenses stern advice and $35 blessings to his congregation of mostly single mothers and their children. \"Just bringing children to the face of the earth is not enough,\" Prophet Titus intones. \"You owe them more.\""
"Nicholas's job during church is to keep the younger children quiet, sometimes with a brother asleep on one thigh and a cousin on the other. Their mother keeps watch from her perch up front where she sings. When the little ones get too loud, their mother shoots them a threatening look from behind the microphone that says, \"You know better.\" Grandmother, Empress"
"On this weeknight, Nicholas and Willie are with cousins and other children listening to their grandmother's Bible lesson."
"She is a proud woman who worked for 22 years as a meat wrapper at a supermarket, reared five children of her own, has stepped in to help raise some of her grandchildren and packs a .38 in her purse in case some stranger tries to rob her again. On Sundays and during Bible class, she is not merely Nicholas's grandmother but Imperial Empress Magdala in her velvet-collared cape."
"The children recite Bible verses (\"I am black but beautiful,\" from Solomon or \"My skins is black,\" from Job), and then Mrs. Whitiker breaks into a free-form lecture that seems a mix of black pride and Dianetics."
"\"Be dignified,\" she told the children. \"Walk like a prince or princess. We're about obeying our parents and staying away from people who don't mean us any good.\""
"The boys got home late that night, but their day was not done. \"Your clothes are in the tub,\" their mother said, pointing to the bathroom, \"and the kitchen awaits you.\""
"\"I know my baby's running out of hands,\" she said under her breath."
"This is not the life Nicholas envisions for himself when he grows up. He has thought about this, and says he doesn't want any kids. Well, maybe a boy, one boy he can play ball with and show how to be a man. Definitely not a girl. \"I don't want no girl who'll have four or five babies,\" he said. \"I don't want no big family with 14, 20 people, all these people to take care of. When you broke they still ask you for money, and you have to say, 'I'm broke. I don't have no money.' \" A Sister Safe"
"Ishtar made it home safely the afternoon Nicholas was called to the principal's office. Mr. Mason was a couple of hours late picking her up, but he came through in the end."
"Nicholas worries anyway, the way big brothers do. He worried the morning his mother had an early test and he had to take the little ones to day care before going to school himself."
"John-John began to cry as Nicholas walked away. Nicholas bent down and hugged him and kissed him. Everything, Nicholas assured him, was going to be O.K."
